Archive program description:
The purpose of the archive application is to facilitate maintaining
previous versions of edited source PDS members (and sequential
datasets) 'transparently'.  It is intended for source (text) datasets
and PDSs only, and handles only ISPF edit as a means of altering
datasets and members.

Its benefits are:
Uses ISPF edit to update source data - no new editing to learn, new
features accrue with ISPF.
Archive creation, deletion, and backup are simple and efficient using
standard z/OS utilities.
It is possible to archive any source dataset* that we control update of
- e.g. SYS1.PARMLIB.
Both source and control datasets are standard datasets or PDSs - they
can be SMS managed, archived, etc.
An archive control PDS can constitute a complete PDS backup - recovery
of the source PDS can be as simple as copying the archive control PDS
into it.
It can also maintain a 'Last Known Working Member' - a backup of a
member as of its last known 'good' version.  This is useful for datasets
like SYS1.IPLPARM and SYS1.PARMLIB, where the system may be unavailable
to restore a member to a previous version, but an alternate member can
be specified for the IPL.
We own the source code - alterations and improvements are at our
discretion.

Its detriments are:
It is neither bulletproof nor foolproof - Use of utilities other than
ISPF edit to alter source or control dataset contents will affect the
integrity of the archive.  The source may or may not be recoverable.
It acts to facilitate a source control convention, it does not enforce
it.  Archives can be intentionally bypassed or altered to affect (or
effect) an apparent history which is bogus.  In order for archiving to
work, anyone having update access to a source dataset must also have
update access to the archive control dataset.

Additional available commands while editing an archived source:
COMPARE vers     - compare the currently edited source to a previous
                   version
HISTORY | HIST   - display a table of all of the available versions of
                   this source
                 - from the table, you can display the history entry
                   or view a specific version
OPTIONS | OPTS   - set Dataset or Member options for an archive
RESTORE vers     - restore the currently edited source to a previous
                   version
VIEW vers        - view a previous version of the edited source

where vers = {Ýv¨VV.MM} or {-N}
      VV and MM can be 1 or 2 digits that specify the absolute
      version.  N is a non-zero whole number that specifies how
      many versions to go back (e.g. -1 is the previous version).
      Thus, if the archive consists of versions 01.03,01.12,02.05,02.06
      where 2.06 is the currently edited version,
      COMPARE -2 will compare the current version with v01.12 and
      RESTORE v1.3 will restore the member to v01.03.

*Restrictions on datasets that can be archived:
Datasets must be editable by ISPF edit - DSORG PS or PO, RECFM F or V
(not U).
For source datasets with a separate control dataset, the target DSN must
be 40 characters or less.
The source dataset can not end with '.ARC'.
For PDS targets which are their own control, LRECL must be at least 80
(84 for RECFM V).

Additional available ISPF PDS member list commands:
H                - Same as HISTORY, above
O                - Same as OPTIONS, above

Future features that should be implemented:
The external data editing commands CREATE, MOVE and REPLACE commands
should be DEFINEd to allow checking for creating, deleting or
overwriting archives regardless of whether they are used in an archived
dataset or not.
The BuiltIn, Define, Stats, Version and Level commands should be DEFINEd
to deny inappropriate usage.
An option should be provided to drop versions of edited data more than a
certain age or number of versions.
A utility should be provided to allow the user to change the data
description, and perhaps to set/change an archive description.
