General table display
---------------------

This shows the arguments to the general table display exec.  The
exec is designed to be invoked from another exec or (more likely) from
an IPSF panel.  For this reason, none of the keywords may be
abbreviated but must, in order to provide documentation, be coded in
full.

%UTCTSHAR    The command name. Designed not to be memorable, so that
             it should not clash with another

  Arguments:

   TABLE(name)         required
   LIBRARY(ddname)    } mutually exclusive
   DATASET(dsname)    }
   TBPAN(panel1)       required
   FULLPAN(panel2)     required
   SCAN(scanparm)      optional
   REFRESH             optional
   DESCENDING          optional

name         The ISPF table to be displayed
ddname       Pre-allocated DDname of the library containing the table
dsname       fully qualified dataset name (coded without quotes) of
               the library containing the table. DDNAME and DATASET
               are mutually exclusive; if both are coded (not
               recommended) only DATASET is used.
panel1       Scrollable panel to display table rows
panel2       Display panel for full details of one row only
scanparm     YES - enable row scanning
             NO  - row scanning not needed

             The recommended value for this parm is YES


REFRESH      Re-open the table on each redisplay. Not usually needed.
DESCENDING   Show the table in descending sequence.


General way of handling variables in a single row
-------------------------------------------------

UTCTBTMP can be invoked by UTCTSHAR to display all the Named and
Extension variables on a single table row.

   UPDATE            } mutually exclusive; if neither specified,
   BROWSE            } BROWSE assumed

                      all keyword parameters optional
   PANEL(panelid)
   NAMETB(nametb)     all keyword parameters optional
   DATASET(namelib)
   NAMEDD(namedd)
   THISDA(homeda)
   THISDD(homedd)



 UPDATE   say whether changes to the table are allowed or not
 BROWSE
 panelid  name of panel to be used to show the variables on the row.
          default panelid is UTPTBTMP.

These keyword parameters are only needed if there is a table available
which contains a description of what variable names mean.


 nametb     table name
 namelib  } mutualy exclusive: dataset name or DDname of library
 namedd   ) containing the table.  These over-ride HOMEDA and HOMEDD
 homeda   } mutualy exclusive: dataset name or DDname of library
 homedd   ) containing the table.  These are provided from UTCTSHAR
            automatically, making NAMELIB and NAMEDD unnecessary when
            the names table is on the same library as the displayed
            table

























































































