
                Clemson University Service Processors

This library contains the source modules and macros for the Clemson
University Service Processors.

These materials are being made available to cbttape.org under the Apache
2.0 license.  See member $LICENSE or refer to Apache's web site at
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Naming Conventions
------------------
  o The member describing what is in this library (this member), is
    named $MEMBERS.
  o The "Service Processors User's Guide and Reference" manual is
    contained in members beginning with the prefix SRVDOC.  These
    members are the original BookMaster source and are here for
    reference.  The documentation intended for use is included in the
    CBT package as a single html file, srvdoc.html.
  o The names of all members containing service processor code
    (source, copy, macro, and load) should begin with SRVsp, where
    'sp' is one of the two-letter codes in the table below:

    sp                              Description
    --   ----------------------------------------------------------
    ##   Internal-use Service Processor Macros.
    CM   Composite Environment Support & Standard Module Name Table.
    DT   Date/Time Service Processor.
    DV   Data In Virtual Service Processor.
    ES   Environment Support Service Processor(s).
    FI   File Handler Service Processors.
    IM   Item Manager Service Processor.
    MM   Memory Manager Service Processor.
    MN   Module Name Tables.
    MS   Message Server Service Processor.
    PL   Printline Service Processor.
    ST   String Handler Service Processor.
    SY   Symbol Manager Service Processor.

    New service processors should be assigned a new two-letter code and
    the table above should be updated.  The remaining characters (after
    SRVsp) should be chosen as follows:

    SRVESenv  - Source code for an Environment Support service
                processor, such as SRVESMVS.
    SRVESXnn  - Source code for Environment Support exit routines.
    SRV$$env  - Source and Link-edit JCL for an Environment Support's
                Standard Module Name Table; 'env' will always be equal
                to the 'env' of the Environment Support for which the
                table exists.
    SRVsp     - Source code for an environment-independent service
                processor.
    SRVspenv  - Source code for an environment-dependent service
                processor; 'env' should be the same as that of the
                Environment Support service processor on which it
                depends, unless there is good reason for another choice.
                For example, the File Handlers use 'env' to refer to the
                type of files they can handle, although all of them are
                dependent on SRVESMVS (they can't all be called
                SRVFIMVS, so another choice for 'env' was mandated).
    SRVspMAC  - Copy code containing symbol definitions and macros
                defining a service processor's protocol.
    SRVspIMC  - Copy code containing internal-use symbols and macros for
                a specific service processor.
    SRVspXRZ  - Source code for an excersizer program that tests as many
                features of the associated service processor as
                possible.
                *hint* These routines can be used as working examples.

Other useful members:

    LNKCMMVS  - Will link Service Processor modules with SRVESMVS, so that
                fewer LOADs will occur when applications start Service
                Processors.  Useful for placing a production version of
                Service Processors in the linklist.  Does not include
                SRVFIOS or SRVPLMVS, since those modules are RMODE(24).

    SRVLEVEL and SRVMOD - These modules include level and copyright info
                in module headers at assembly time.

