)Attr Default(%+_)
   ` area(SCRL) Extend(ON)
)Body
%Tutorial ------------------ Learning PDS, Preface -------------------- Tutorial
%Command ===>_zcmd
+
                                                                  %Up F10 Dn F11
`sam --------------------------------------------------------------------------`
)Area Sam


                  The PDS Program  -  Course PREFACE


        This is the preface to members $PDSART1, $PDSART2, and $PDSART3,
which constitute a short course of study to expand the user's horizons
and skill with the PDS program product.  In this preface, I'd like to
explain the origins and purpose of the course.

        The material consists of drafts of a three part series of
articles in "Technical Support" magazine from NaSPA (National Systems
Programmers Association in Milwaukee, Wisconsin).  Edited versions of
these drafts were published in the January, February, and March 1988
issues of the magazine.  Bob Becker, the editor, kindly gave
permission for the authors of PDS to include the material within the
package itself.  Bruce Leland and Steve Smith, (and I) thank Bob for his
support.

        My aim is to present an introductory though somewhat
sophisticated course.  I think it will help all users to widen their
view of this extraordinarily helpful package.  One of the difficulties
in writing any course on the PDS product is the fact that PDS varies
qualitatively from release to release.  The beauty of the product is
that Bruce Leland and Steve Smith are constantly taking suggestions
from users the world over, and are always improving the product in
some way.  Usage of subcommands and ISPMODE commands may differ
somewhat between one version and the next.  But it is also our
realization that the user community as a whole cannot appreciate the
enormity of the product without a good overview.  How can a new user
or even an "experienced" user get INTO the PDS capabilities more?  I
feel that despite the difficulties, a short introductory course of
study was necessary, to bring the diamond to its beholders.

        I have therefore made some decisions.  My course will be about
ONE RELEASE LEVEL.  At the time of its writing, the current level of PDS
was 8.0.  Therefore, the course describes Release 8.0 and not 7.3 or the
previous levels.  My experience from the past shows me, that if a user
is familiar with one level of PDS, it is relatively easy to get
accustomed to and appreciate the luxuries of the next release.  Learn
8.0, and you'll know 8.1 and 8.2 too.

        It is anticipated that supplements will be written to extend
the course material to the new features of subsequent releases of
this product.  There is ample "change" documentation from the authors,
though not in "course" format.

        The plan of the course is to COVER THE PDS SUBCOMMANDS.  Our
experience is, that PDS is so vast, that most users really don't exploit
most of its capabilities.  PDS can save its users great amounts of time,
IF YOU GET INTO IT.  This course aims to get people INTO PDS.

       How?  I have taken the PDS subcommands (from Release 8.0) and
organized them into five categories.  By covering one group of commands
at a time, as we start to march through them, we begin to see the
greater picture.  We think it really shows it to you.

       Hopefully, the information is presented slowly and interestingly,
one step at a time, so you can catch your breath.

       The material is divided into three pieces because it was
originally written as three magazine articles.  It is good this way,
because you can digest a little at a time.  Three sittings are better
than one.

       The course does not attempt to convey ALL of PDS.  (That is
perhaps impossible.)  Its purpose is to show how much good that PDS
can do for you.  I personally think that PDS contains possibly
SIXTY PERCENT OF ALL THE TOOLS THAT A SYSTEM PROGRAMMER NEEDS.  That's
putting myself on a limb, but it really isn't.  Just use the product
as part of your ISPF working day, and you'll really see what I mean
after a while.

       Application programmers can benefit from PDS too.  The shop
should have a security package to restrict them to their own data.  If
the subcommand set must be restricted for the application programmers,
this is possible.  Subcommands can be nullified, and there are also
security modules within the PDS distribution package.  See the install
documentation.

       Much thanks are, of course, due to Bruce Leland and Steve Smith,
the authors of PDS, for making all this possible, and for their
continuing cooperation with me.  Thanks are due to all of you too, the
using and contributing public.  PDS would not be what it is, without
all the feedback and suggestions.  (Bruce and Steve put most of them
in.)  Use it all well!



                                       Sam Golob
                                       January 22, 1988
)Init
&zhtop = P86ART0
&zup = P86ART0
&zcont = P86ART1
)Proc
)End
