)F FUNCTION
*** THIS COMMAND CAN BE USED ONLY BY THE COMNET DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT
*** STAFFS

APFCMD allows you to invoke an arbitrary TSO command from an arbitrary
load library in the authorized mode.

APFCMD checks for the presence of either a given ddname or a TASKLIB
ddname. If found, then it establishes that library as the
"task-library" (in place of either a job-library or a step-library)
for the command to be executed. In addition, APFCMD flags the
task-library as being authorized for the duration of the command's
execution.

)X SYNTAX

APFCMD name:ddname operands

         - name is the name of the TSO command to be executed.
         - :ddname is the ddname to be used as a task-library.
         - operands are that command's operands, if any.

required - name
default  - if :ddname is omitted, then ddname TASKLIB, if present, is
           used for the task-library.
         - if : is given without a ddname, then no task-library is
           established - not even the ddname TASKLIB, if present.

)O OPERANDS
))NAME -
This operand gives the name of the TSO command to be executed
authorized. This may be an arbitrary command. It may come from either
the standard link-libraries or from an arbitrary library (pointed to
by the task-library ddname).

))DDNAME -
This operand gives a ddname to be used for a task-library for the
command to be executed. (A task-library is similar to a job-library or
step-library).

If a ddname is given, then it must be appended to the name of the
command to be executed and delimited from that name by a colon (:).

Example:   APFCMD LISTC:MYLIB LEVEL(SYS1)
The library pointed to by the ddname MYLIB is established by APFCMD as
a task-library for LISTC. If the LISTC command is contained in that
library, then it will be loaded from there and executed authorized.

If :ddname is omitted, then APFCMD searches for the ddname TASKLIB. If
found, then that library will be established as a task-library. If not
found, then no task-library is established.

If a colon is given all by itself without a ddname, then no
task-library is established regardless of whether or not a TASKLIB
ddname exists.

))OPERANDS -
These are whatever operands the TSO command needs. They should NOT be
framed by any special characters.

