)F FUNCTION
*** THIS COMMAND CAN BE USED ONLY BY THE COMNET DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT
*** STAFFS

APFPGM allows you to invoke an arbitrary "batch" program from an
arbitrary load library in the authorized mode.

APFPGM checks for the presence of either a given ddname or a TASKLIB
ddname. If found, then it establishes that library as the
"task-library" (in place of either a job-library or a step-library)
for the program to be executed. In addition, APFPGM flags the
task-library as being authorized for the duration of the program's
execution.

)X SYNTAX

APFPGM name:ddname parms

         - name is the name of the "batch" program to be executed.
         - :ddname is the ddname to be used as a task-library.
         - parms are that program's PARM field data, if any.

required - name
default  - if :ddname is omitted, then ddname TASKLIB, if present, is
           used for the task-library.
         - if : is given without a ddname, then no task-library is
           established - not even the ddname TASKLIB, if present.

)O OPERANDS
))NAME -
This operand gives the name of the "batch" program to be executed
authorized. This may be an arbitrary program. It may come from either
the standard link-libraries or from an arbitrary library (pointed to
by the task-library ddname).

))DDNAME -
This operand gives a ddname to be used for a task-library for the
program to be executed. (A task-library is similar to a job-library or
step-library).

If a ddname is given, then it must be appended to the name of the
program to be executed and delimited from that name by a colon (:).

Example:   APFPGM IEHMOVE:MYLIB POWER=2
The library pointed to by the ddname MYLIB is established by APFPGM as
a task-library for IEHMOVE. If the IEHMOVE program is contained in that
library, then it will be loaded from there and executed authorized.
PARM='POWER=2' will be passed to IEHMOVE.

If :ddname is omitted, then APFPGM searches for the ddname TASKLIB. If
found, then that library will be established as a task-library. If not
found, then no task-library is established.

If a colon is given all by itself without a ddname, then no
task-library is established regardless of whether or not a TASKLIB
ddname exists.

))PARMS -
These are whatever PARM field data the "batch" program needs. They
should NOT be framed by any special characters.

