                             DOCUMENTATION

       Included in this file are three programs I found in an old
library of utilities which came from MEMOREX and which was file 313 on
CBT tapes version 260 and previous.  This file was deleted from
version 261 of the CBT tape.  Version 249, obtainable from SHARE (see
file 1 for how) has this file as file 313.

        That file from MEMOREX is vast (over 100,000 lines) and old.
It is very much worth exploring.  Many of the programs have to be
informed that the more recent types of disk volumes, for example 3380,
and in some cases even 3350, exist.  After that, some of them can be
very useful.

        Programs included here are:

  JCLSCAN   -  A TSO command processor which calls the MVS JCL converter
                  to check a dataset of JCL for errors.  Since the
                  actual converter from IBM is used, you get the same
                  result as if you did TYPRUN=SCAN, but without running
                  a job.  It uses an SVC to do the calling of the
                  converter.  Output is displayed at the tube in a
                  very convenient format.

  COPYPACK  -  A batch utility which copies (and optionally recatalogs)
                  groups of datasets, by partial name, from one disk
                  pack to another.  It can handle DSORG=PO, PS, or DA.
                  All such datasets on the entire pack can be moved.
                  Allocation of the target datasets is done by the
                  program automatically.  Parm input provides much power
                  and flexibility.  This can save you a lot of work.

  DOWNDATE  -  A utility which creates an IEBUPDTE-format difference
                  deck between two versions of a source program.  This
                  not only flags differences, but allows you to convert
                  from one source deck to the other by means of the
                  difference deck.

                       Resubmitted to the CBT tape Oct. 1988 by
                          Sam Golob
          new address     P.O. Box 906
                          Tallman, NY 10982-0906
                                           email: sbgolob@attglobal.net
