
))DRIBBLE

  If DRIBBLE is specified, all terminal input and output of the LISP
  session is recorded on the held SYSOUT class.  You may then browse
  this output on the JES spool, requeue it for printing, or copy it
  into a data set (e.g. from SDSF).

  Note: DRIBBLE is available only for interactive sessions.  For
        example, you cannot specify DRIBBLE when running the ZIL
        compiler.

))NEW

  If NEW is specified, an alternate version (test release) of the ZIL
  system is invoked.  Do not specify both OLD and NEW.

))OLD

  If OLD is specified, a backup version (prior release) of the ZIL
  system is invoked.  Do not specify both OLD and NEW.

))ACSIZE

  The size of the ZIL CONS space ("free list") to be considered active
  initially.  This value may be specified as an integer or a value in
  the format nnnK or nnnM.  If this is omitted, the ZIL system's
  default value is used.

  This value controls how much of the total CONS space (as specified
  by CSSIZE) is in use, until it is determined (by the ZIL garbage
  collector) that more space is needed, at which time the ACSIZE
  value is doubled, provided that it does not exceed the CSSIZE value.

))CSSIZE

  The size of the ZIL CONS space ("free list") to be allocated at
  initialization time.  This value may be specified as an integer or
  a value in the format nnnK or nnnM.  If this is omitted, the ZIL
  system's default value is used.

  This value represents the TOTAL allocation, not to be confused with
  the initial ACTIVE size of the space - see ACSIZE.

))PDSIZE

  The size of the ZIL control stack to be allocated at initialization.
  This value may be specified as an integer or a value in the format
  nnnK or nnnM.  If this is omitted, the ZIL system's default value is
  used.

))VSSIZE

  The size of ZIL vector/string space (the space used to build vectors,
  strings, structures, and other non-list objects) to be allocated at
  initialization time.  This value may be specified as an integer or a
  value in the format nnnK or nnnM.  If this is omitted, the ZIL
  system's default value is used.

  Note that this space is allocated in duplicate, due to the copying
  garbage collection scheme used for this space in ZIL.  Thus in
  actuality twice the specified value is required.

