)F Function -

   This CLIST allocates a ZIL output file (ZIL is an implementation
   of the LISP language developed at Draper Laboratory for the MVS
   operating system).

   Output files are referenced within ZIL by file names, which are
   atoms whose print names are 4 characters long or less.
   These correspond to MVS ddnames which are 8 characters long or
   less, which are generated by prefixing the ZIL file name with
   "ZILO".  For example:

   (PRINT 'HI 'FOO)  will print the atom "HI" on the output file
                     allocated to ddname ZILOFOO.

   The XZOFREE CLIST will free a file allocated by this CLIST.

   Notes:

   When the dataset is created as NEW, it is assigned the
   following DCB attributes:

    RECFM=FB, LRECL=80,BLKSIZE=800

   For information on how ZIL files work, see member $FILE of the
   documentation contained in 'PROGLIB.ZIL.TEXT'.

   For information on how to use ZIL, you may browse or print out the
   on-line documentation contained in 'PROGLIB.ZIL.TEXT'.

)X Syntax -

   XZOFILE 'filename'
           'datasetname'
           REUSE
           RELEASE
           NEW/OLD/MOD

   Required - 'filename' and 'datasetname'

   Defaults:  If the specified dataset already exists, OLD;
              otherwise NEW.

)O Operands -

)P'filename'

  Must be a valid ZIL file name of from 1 to 4 characters, and not
  NIL or T.  The characters "ZILO" will be appended to the beginning
  of this file name to make the MVS ddname.

  If the ddname is already allocated, this CLIST will fail unless
  the REUSE keyword is specified.

  The dataset will be opened for output the first time it is referenced
  by the ZIL interpreter or other program;  if it is not referenced, it
  will remain unchanged.

)P'datasetname'

  The name of a data set to be associated with the specified file name.
  The data set may be an existing on-line data set, in which case the
  disposition defaults to OLD, or it may not yet exist, in which case
  it is created with a default disposition of NEW.

))RELEASE

  Specifies whether unused space should be released to the operating
  system when the dataset is closed, i.e. when the ZIL interpreter or
  other program terminates.  The default is not to release unused
  space.

))REUSE

  You must specify REUSE if the ddname may be already allocated and you
  want to free and reallocate it.  If you do not specify this
  parameter, the CLIST will fail if the ddname is already in use under
  your TSO session.

))NEW

  Specifies that the dataset does not currently exist and is to be
  created with a disposition of NEW.  If the dataset already exists,
  the CLIST will fail.

))OLD

  Specifies that the dataset already exists and is to be allocated with
  a disposition of OLD (shared use is not permitted by this CLIST).
  If the dataset does not exist or is not on-line, the CLIST will fail.

))MOD

  If the dataset already exists, this specifies that it is to be
  allocated with a disposition of MOD, i.e. data is to be written at
  the end of the data set instead of having the current data
  overwritten.

  If the dataset does not already exist, this is equivalent to NEW.

