   This program will read SMF data (from the active MAN dataset or
  output from IFASMFDP), and will select records according to user
  specified criteria. Records can be selected by date and time,
  by record type (and /or subtype), by Jobname, or by data at an
  offset within the record. Records must meet date/time and
  record type criteria before being eligible for selection, as
  determined by Jobname and/or data specifications.

   By default, any records selected from the input will be printed
  to SYSPRINT, unless 'PRINT=NO' is specified in the SYSIN control
  cards. If SYSUT2 is present, the selected input records will
  also be written to it.

   Multiple output files with different selection criteria can be
  produced in one run of SMFSLCT. The output DDNames and selection
  criteria are specified in the control cards in SYSIN.

   This program was originally written in PL/1, and subsequently
  converted to Assembler - the arcane format of the control cards was
  maintained for compatability reasons.

   Standard disclaimers apply - use at your own risk.

  Attributes:
      Re-entrant, Reuseable, Refreshable, Not Authorized,
      AMODE(31), RMODE(ANY)

  Input:
      SYSUT1   - SMF dataset - either the output from IFASMFDP or
                 one of the SYS1.MAN datasets. If this DDName is
                 not allocated when the program is invoked, it will
                 be dynamically allocated to the active SMF dataset.
      SYSIN    - Control cards (see below).

  Output:
      SYSPRINT - Error messages, selected SMF records.
      SYSUT2   - optional, selected SMF records.
      anyname  - Optional, selected SMF records.


                 C o n t r o l   C a r d s

   Control cards are entered via SYSIN. Only columns 1-72 are
  scanned, and the scan terminates with the first blank. Cont-
  inuations are not allowed, but keywords can be specified more
  than once. If a keyword that has a single value (ie, START=)
  is specified more than once within an output group, or globally,
  the last value specified is used.

   OUTPUT=DDName
      specifies the DDName of an output dataset. All subsequent
                control statements, until the next "OUTPUT="
                statement or end-of-file, determine which input
                records will be selected to this DDName. All
                control statements appearing before an "OUTPUT="
                statement apply to all output DDNames, unless
                specifically overridden by control statements
                entered after the "OUTPUT=" statement.


   START=yyddd-hhmmss
         yyyyddd-hhmmss
         TODAY-hhmmss
         (TODAY-n)-hhmmss
         YESTERDAY-hhmmss
         THISWEEK-hhmmss
         LASTWEEK-hhmmss
         THISMONTH-hhmmss
         LASTMONTH-hhmmss
      specifies the date and time at which selection of input
                records is to start. Defaults to 00000-000000 (ie
                the start of the input file). The specification of
                time (-hhmmss) is optional - if omitted, it defaults
                to 00:00:00.00.
                Dates using the 2-digit year format will default
                to 20th century dates (i.e. 1900-1999).
                YESTERDAY is equivalent to specifying (TODAY-1).
                Note that a week starts on Monday, and ends on
                Sunday. Thus, specifying START=LASTWEEK will start
                selecting records from the Monday of the previous
                week.

   END=yyddd-hhmmss
       yyyyddd-hhmmss
       TODAY-hhmmss
       (TODAY-n)-hhmmss
       YESTERDAY-hhmmss
       THISWEEK-hhmmss
       LASTWEEK-hhmmss
       THISMONTH-hhmmss
       LASTMONTH-hhmmss
      specifies the date and time at which selection if input
                records is to stop. Defaults to 2699999-235959 (ie
                the end of the input file). The specification of
                time (-hhmmss) is optional - if omitted, it defaults
                to 23:59:59.99.
                Dates using the 2-digit year format will default
                to 20th century dates (i.e. 1900-1999).
                YESTERDAY is equivalent to specifying (TODAY-1).
                Note that a week starts on Monday, and ends on
                Sunday. Thus, specifying END=LASTWEEK will stop
                selecting records on the Sunday of the previous
                week.

   PERIOD=hhmmss-hhmmss
      specifies the start and stop time-of-day between which input
                records will be eligible for selection. Records for
                each day, as specified by start/end or defaulted,
                falling outside these times will be ignored.
                 The time can be specified as hh, hhmm or hhmmss;
                the missing digits will default to 0.
                 Defaults to "PERIOD=000000-240000".

   WEEKENDS=IGNORE
      specifies that SMF data generated on Saturday and Sunday will
                be ignored.

   INCLUDE=nn<(ss)>
      specifies that record type nn should be selected. A subtype
                ss can also be optionally included, in parentheses.
                If more that one record type is coded on the
                control card, the record types (and subtypes)
                must be enclosed in parentheses.
                Note that 'INCLUDE' is mutually exclusive with the
                'EXCLUDE' keyword within an "OUTPUT=" definition,
                or globally, if no "OUTPUT=" statement is present.

   EXCLUDE=nn<(ss)>
      specifies that record type nn should not be selected. A
                subtype ss can optionally be included, in paren-
                theses. If more than one record type is coded,
                the record types (and subtypes) and subtypes must
                be enclosed in parentheses.
                Note that 'EXCLUDE' is mutually exclusive with the
                'INCLUDE' keyword within an "OUTPUT=" definition,
                or globally, if no "OUTPUT=" statement is present.

   PRINT=NO
   PRINT=EBCDIC
         NO     specifies that selected records are not to be
                printed on SYSPRINT. If an output ddname is
                present, selected records will be written to it.
         EBCDIC specifies that selected records are to be printed
                on SYSPRINT in EBCDIC only (the default is dump
                format). If an output ddname is present, the
                selected records will be written to it.

   SEQUENCE=YES
                specifies that the input records are in date/time
                sequence. If 'SEQUENCE=YES' is specified, SMFSLCT
                will terminate as soon as a record with a date
                stamp past the 'END=' date/time is encountered.
                Normal SMFSLCT processing assumes that the input
                records are not in sequence, and invokes
                termination at end-of-file.

   CHECKVBS=NO
                specifies that no checking should be performed for
                variable spanned segmentation errors. If this
                is specified, QSAM will be used to read SYSUT1,
                and invalid segment sequences will cause an S002
                (or potentially other system) abend. The default
                is that BSAM will be used to read VS or VBS files,
                and invalid segments discarded.
                Note that using BSAM requires more CPU time; where
                the input file is known to be 'clean', specifying
                CHECKVBS=NO will reduce the CPU time used by this
                program.

   JOBNAME=jjjjjjjj
      specifies that all records (subject to "INCLUDE"/"EXCLUDE",
                above), Job (or TSU or STC) jjjjjjjj should be
                selected.
                If more that one jobname is coded, the jobnames
                should be enclosed in parentheses.
                 If the last character in the jobname is an
                asterisk, the characters preceeding the asterisk
                considered a prefix, and all jobnames that match
                the prefix will be selected.

   DATA=xxx<,nn>
      specifies the character string that must be present in the
                input record before it will be selected.
                DATA= indicates that the string xxx (specified
                      either as a data(xxx...x), a character string
                      (C'xxx...x) or a hex string(X'xxx...x)) must
                      start at offset position nn (nn=0-32767,
                      default=0), for the input record to be
                      selected. Note that the offset must include
                      the length of the RDW.

   JOB/DATA=OR
      specifies that the selection algorithm should select an
                      input record if either the Jobname or data
                      specifications are met. The default is that
                      both Jobname and data criteria must be
                      satisfied before a record will be selected.

   STOPAFT=nnn
      specifies that SMFSLCT is to terminate after selecting nnn
                      records (nnn = 1 to 999999999). The default
                      is to terminate when end-of-file is reached
                      on input.

   INEXIT=(member-name<,parm>)
      specifies that SMFSLCT is to invoke member-name after
                      each SMF record is read from the input, and
                      after checking the date/time against "START="
                      and "END=", but before checking any other
                      selection criteria.
                      "parm" is an optional string that will be
                      passed to the exit each time it is invoked.
                      If present, the operands of INEXIT= must
                      be enclosed in parentheses. Further, if parm
                      contains a close parenthesis, it must be
                      enclosed in quotes (as per IBM, if parm also
                      contains a quote, it must be coded as two
                      two consecutive quotes).

   OUTEXIT=(member-name<,parm>)
      specifies that SMFSLCT is to invoke member-name after
                      an SMF record has been selected, but before
                      the record is printed and/or written to the
                      output file(s).
                      "parm" is an optional string that will be
                      passed to the exit each time it is invoked.
                      If present, the operands of OUTEXIT= must
                      be enclosed in parentheses. Further, if parm
                      contains a close parenthesis, it must be
                      enclosed in quotes (as per IBM, if parm also
                      contains a quote, it must be coded as two
                      two consecutive quotes).
