
                ISPF Commands Tool (version 7.0)
               ----------------------------------
  This tool enables the user to dynamically display and modify all their
  ISPF commands, from (almost) any ISPF panel.  It provides easy search
  facilities and shows command relationships to simplify the management
  of very large numbers of commands.  That empowers the user to fully
  exploit the flexibility of commands for invoking all their ISPF
  activities.
  This tool is packaged with an "Enhanced ISPF Configuration Utility"
  included to make it easier for users to configure their ISPF.


Why do you need this tool?
--------------------------
It is possible for TSO users to have up to 8 active ISPF command tables,
but IBM still provide only the old option 3.9 "Command Table Utility" to
display or update them.  Particularly if you are going to use many
command tables with a large number of commands you will benefit from a
much more sophisticated tool to manage them.  This tool provides all the
same functionality (as 3.9) plus much more, including:

 1) While in any ISPF application, it can display the full list of
    available commands from all the command tables active in that
    application, or you can select just particular tables.
    It can also open inactive command tables for display and update.

 2) The list of commands is in the standard ISPF order, or you can
    sort the list into different orders (eg. command name order).

 3) You can list only the commands with names matching a particular mask
    (eg. listing only commands beginning with "REF").
    You can list only the commands with a particular string in their
    description or action (eg. listing only commands with "KEY").

 4) It shows the relationships between commands in all the tables.  It
    indicates commands which OVERRIDE others (and which are overridden)
    It shows the valid TRUNCATIONS allowed for commands.  It tracks
    command ALIAS chains to show the effective action of such commands.

 5) It can display which libraries the active command tables are in,
    plus some table statistics.

 6) You can ADD, UPDATE or DELETE the commands in any active command
    table.  You can also COPY or MOVE commands within or between tables.
    All the changes are immediately active, without restarting ISPF.
    Thus you can temporarily change the commands in any ISPF application
    while you are actually using it.

 7) You can permanently SAVE any command changes to disk, except for the
    ISPCMDS table.

 8) It can create new Application-, User- or Site- command tables.

There are extensive HELP panels detailing the functionality, plus much
information about ISPF command tables and how to configure them.


Installation
------------
  This version is compatible with all ISPF releases from version 3.4 to
  version 5.8 (z/OS 1.8).  The included Configuration Utility can get
  your current ISPF configuration parameters only up to version 5.7,
  but it will create a usable keyword file which can be used with later
  versions of ISPF.

  a) Assemble/Link members ISPFCMDL & ISPFCMDO

  b) Copy ISPFCMDS member to a library in the SYSEXEC (or SYSPROC)
     concatenation

  c) Copy all other ISPFCMxx members into the ISPPLIB concatenation

  d) Copy all JSPCxxxx members to a library in the SYSEXEC (or SYSPROC)
     concatenation

  e) Copy all JSPPCxxx members into the ISPPLIB concatenation

  Notes:
  - It is worthwhile to compile the Rexx module ISPFCMDS, to get better
    performance (mainly because of its size).

  - It is designed to be used from within every other ISPF application,
    hence it should be in base libraries and not LIBDEF'd.

  - This tool is most useful when User & Site command tables have been
    defined in the ISPF configuration module, hence it is recommended
    that some are defined.

  - Control of the updating of the disk copy of any command tables is
    left to an external security product (eg. RACF).

  - After installation, the product can be quickly checked by following
    the instructions in the $IVP member of this library.


Use
---
  It is invoked by 'TSO %ISPFCMDS' or better yet - create a command
  like the following:
    Verb  . . . : CMDS
    Trunc . . . : 0
    Action  . . : SELECT CMD(%ISPFCMDS &ZPARM) SCRNAME(CMDS)
    Description : 'ISPF Commands' tool

  If ISPFCMDS is compiled use:
    Action  . . : SELECT CMD(ISPFCMDS &ZPARM) SCRNAME(CMDS) LANG(CREX)

  - It will work with future versions of ISPF by assuming that the names
    of any tables which are defined but not active, can be found in an
    ISPF configuration module with the same name and field offsets as
    for ISPF for z/OS 1.7 (version 5.7).  That assumption will probably
    be true for at least the next few ISPF releases.


Support
-------
  The author, Ron Brown, can be contacted at:  Ron_Brown@hotmail.com

