)F REXXFORM

  REXXFORM is an ISPF edit macro used to format REXX EXECs by indenting
  DO and SELECT groups and left-justifying lines at a selected column.
  It also checks for unbalanced DO or SELECT statements.  One use of
  this ISPF edit macro is to uniformly restructure REXX files after
  composing them without regard for any particular format or standard
  coding style.

)X Syntax

  REXXFORM <left-margin indent>  <( <CJ> <CI> >

)O Operands

))Left-Margin

   Specifies that all lines are either left-justified at this column, or
   indented one or more columns to the right of this column.  The column
   given by this argument must be a positive number not exceeding the
   width of the file.  If not given, it is assumed to be 4.

))Indent

   Specifies how many columns each DO or SELECT group is to be indented
   to the right of the left-margin given by the first argument.  As each
   DO or SELECT is encountered, the margin is moved "indent" to the
   right.  As each END is encountered, the margin is moved "indent" to
   the left.  If "indent" is not given, it is assumed to be 3.  If
   "indent" is 0, the set of specified lines is left-justified at the
   column "left-margin".

))Options

  Comment lines and lines that are part of a comment are not shifted
  unless CJ or CI is given.  The option CI causes these lines to be
  indented like all other lines, and CJ causes them to be left-justified
  at column 1.

))USAGE NOTES:

  The TRUNC setting is the active right boundary as determined by the
  ISPF BNDS setting. This can be viewed by entering BNDS on any lines
  record number. The default is the current record length, taking into
  considerations if numbering is enabled.

  If REXXFORM attempts to indent a line past the current TRUNC setting,
  it will first see if the line contains a REXX comment, and if so, try
  to shift the comment left. Thus if the line:

     a = 23                         /* Set our initial hamster value */

  must be indented six spaces, and the end of the comment is already at
  the TRUNC setting, REXXFORM would produce this:

         a = 23                     /* Set our initial hamster value */

  If REXXFORM cannot indent the comment far enough (or the line does not
  contain a comment), it will not indent the line, but will instead
  issue a warning message including the line number.

  When REXXFORM completes, it will display the line numbers of lines
  containing unbalanced DOs, SELECTs, or ENDs.  In some cases, it will
  detect that a comment or string is unbalanced (terminal '*/' or ending
  quote-mark missing).

  REXXFORM without arguments is equivalent to "REXXFORM 4 3".

  REXX labels are indented one level to the left (if possible) to make
  the program more legible.

  REXXFORM does not check keyword syntax.  Thus, any unquoted and
  uncommented DO, SELECT or END word will affect the indentation.  In
  addition, quoted strings that exceed the maximum limit are not
  detected.  To check such syntactical constructs, use the initial REXX
  instruction "trace scan".  The worst that can happen is that the
  indentation will not be consistent throughout the unsaved file with an
  message display about some unbalanced DO, SELECT, or END construct.

  This macro only reformats the specified lines by adding or deleting
  leading blanks according to the arguments given.  No new lines are
  added and no data other than leading blanks are affected.  In
  particular, non-leading blanks are not affected.  However, as for any
  macro that changes your active file, you may wish to make a temporary
  copy if you are not sure that the result will be acceptable.

)Origin

  This command and help file were converted from the XEDIT version to
  run as an ISPF edit macro and TSO help file.

  Original author: Jeffery Almoney
  Other Updates:   Robert Fowles
                   Phil Smith III
                   Denis J. Audet
  ISPF Conversion: Lionel B. Dyck
