This member (document) describes how to setup and use the XMITSDSF
command within SDSF to e-mail a sysout file.

Overview

XMITSDSF is a rexx command that is invoked from a Program Function Key
when browsing a spool file in SDSF.  The PFK setup will extract the
currently viewed spool file to a disk file and then invoke XMITSDSF
which will then invoke XMITIPFE (a front-end to the XMITIP ISPF
interface).  This allows the user to relatively easily e-mail the spool
file.  Upon return from XMITIPFE the XMITSDSF will delete the extracted
file on disk.

The XMITSDSF will setup the file for e-mailing as an RTF file with a
filename of SDSFhhmm.RTF and a format of Landscape orientation, 9 point
font, and letter size paper.

Setup

To setup this:

1. Get into ISPF
2. Enter TSO %SETSDSFK option

   where option is the format of the e-mail attachment and may be:

     option  description
     ------  -----------
     blank   For an RTF
     C       For CSV
     H       For HTML
     P       For PDF
     R       For RTF
     T       For Text
     Z       For ZIP

This will set Program Function Key (PFK) 6 for this purpose.

To use:

1. Start SDSF
2. Do a ? next to a job to list the individual dd's
3. Do a S next to the desired dd (spool file) to browse it
4. Press PFK 6
5. Fill in the recipients e-mail address on the XMITIP ISPF panel
6. Press enter to send

Note:
The PFK is setup thus (the command is broken down for you to
understand):
- pt odsn sdsf.list * new
  - pt is short for PRINT
  - odsn is the keyword to indicate that the Output Data Set Name
    follows
  - sdsf.list is the output data set name to be used to hold the
    extracted spool file
  - * indicates to use the TSO Users default volume allocation
  - new indicates that sdsf.list will be allocated new
- ; is used to separate commands
- pt does the actual print to the odsn
- pt close will close the print odsn
- tso %xmitsdsf sdsf.list opt
  - tso is an ispf command that instructs ispf to invoke the following
    as a tso command
  - %xmitsdsf is the name of the command to execute
  - sdsf.list is a parameter to %xmitsdsf and is the file name to
    process
  - opt is the same as the SETSDSF options
