SMTPRTN is the SMTP Returned E-Mail Reporting and Notification Tool

NOTE:  This tool has a pre-requisite of the LDAPMAIL code that is
available in the LDAP package from http://www.geocities.com/lbdyck on
the TCP/IP page along with the XMITIP code in this package.

CAVEAT: This is code that you WILL need to review and customize for your
        environment. If you don't have SDSF it won't work. If you are
        not using RACF then you will need to do some additional
        customization to access the users name. If you don't have a LDAP
        directory with a key of the users name then this will not work
        (but if you have the LDAP lookup and/or validation working for
        XMITIP then you should be able to get this working).

The SMTPRTN JCL is included with the XMITIP Installation PDS. It must be
customized for your environment. Once the JCL is customized you need to:

1. verify that the LDAPMAIL exec is available in the SYSEXEC
   concatenation used in the JCL (note that the rexx code must be
   customized for your LDAP configuration).

2. Customize the SMTPRTN REXX to correctly handle your security package
   for accessing the users name and to direct the e-mail appropriately.
   And to set the name of your SMTP started task(s).

3. Note that the code in XMITIPCU that generates the anti-spoof message
   can be used as a model for accessing the users name.

4. The UIDDD is optional and contains userids and related e-mail
   addresses that are used if the security system does not return a
   name that can be easily used to lookup an e-mail address.

The processing logic is:

1. Step 1 of the batch job uses SDSF in the Status Display. Then uses
the ?  selection command to display the SDSF Output  Display (to see the
output dests). The output is written to a temporary data set.

2. Step 2 is a batch TMP that executes the SMTPRTN code.

a. The SDSFIN DD must refer to the temporary data set created in Step 1.
b. The file is read until the NP (input column) is found, tnen:

   1. the dest is extracted (which is the userid)
   2. a call is made to the get_userid routine which uses the
      RACF LU command to get the users name
   3. the user's name is parsed to get the first and last
      - the middle name/initial is dropped
   4. If the optional uiddd is specified then the userid is checked
      to see if it was provided in this list.  If so then the
      get_address routine is not called.
   5. the get_address routine is then called which does an ldap
      query to get the users e-mail address
   6. xmitip is then called to send an e-mail to the user telling them
      that they have mail to RECEIVE on TSO
