NAME     - AUX2SVG

TITLE    - CICS AUXILLIARY TRACE VISUALIZER

VERSION  - 1.2

FUNCTION - Creates a graphical representation of a CICS auxiliary
           trace printout by using Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG).
           The SVG markup represents the trace data in the form
           of a Unified Modelling Language (UML) Sequence Diagram
           (or at least something quite like it).

           The 'actors' (for example, programs) are listed side-
           by-side at the top of the diagram. A life line is
           drawn vertically below each actor. Interactions
           between actors (for example, calls and returns) are
           represented as arrows drawn between the life lines.
           The vertical axis is time. Each interaction is labeled
           on the left of the diagram with the relative time in
           seconds since the start of the trace and the task id.
           All the interactions for a task are assigned the same
           unique color. Each interaction is annotated with the
           trace sequence number, to enable you to refer back to
           the original trace record for more detail, and a summ-
           ary of the call and return values. Exception responses
           are shown in red.

           You choose which actors you are interested in by
           specifying one or more domain names. For example, if
           you want to visualize TCP/IP socket activity, you
           might specify the PG (program) and SO (socket) domains:

             aux2svg mytrace.txt (PG SO

           If you want to examine a storage allocation problem
           you might specify the SM (storage manager) domain:

             aux2svg mytrace.txt (SM

           By default, ALL domains are selected but this can take
           a long time to process. It is best to restrict the
           actors to a few domains that you are interested in.

USAGE    - You can run this Rexx on an IBM mainframe, or on a PC
           by using Regina Rexx from:

              http://regina-rexx.sourceforge.net

           If you run aux2svg on your mainframe, you should use
           ftp to download the resulting svg and html files by:

           ftp yourmainframe
           youruserid
           yourpassword
           quote site sbdataconn=(IBM-1047,ISO8859-1)
           get 'your.output.html' your.output.html
           get 'your.output.svg'  your.output.svg

           It is easier to download the CICS trace print file and
           run aux2svg.rexx on your PC using Regina Rexx by:

           rexx aux2svg.rexx your.trace.txt (options...

           You can view the resulting SVG file using either:

           1. Mozilla Firefox 1.5, or later, has native SVG rend-
              ering capability.

           2. Microsoft Internet Explorer 6 with the Adobe SVG
              Viewer plugin installed. The plugin is free from
              www.adobe.com. Open the html file created by this
              Rexx if you want to scroll the output in the
              browser. Alternatively, you could publish the html
              file on a web server and point your browser at that
              web server. Adobe SVG Viewer supports the following
              mouse/key actions:
              LeftButton+Ctrl           Zoom in
              LeftButton+Ctrl+Shift     Zoom out
              LeftButton+Alt            Move
              LeftButton+Alt+Shift      Move constrained
              Tool tips are not supported by this viewer yet.

           3. Apache Batik Squiggle program with Sun Java 1.3 or
              later installed. Batik is free from www.apache.org
              To run Squiggle: java -jar batik-squiggle.jar
              Squiggle supports the following mouse/key actions:
              LeftButton+Ctrl (+drag)   Zoom in to rectangle
              LeftButton+Shift (+drag)  Move
              RightButton+Ctrl (+drag)  Rotate
              RightButton+Shift (+drag) Zoom (in or out)
              Squiggle shows tool tips when you hover the mouse
              over items that have a tool tip defined.

           4. Microsoft Visio 2003 or later.

SYNTAX   - AUX2SVG infile Ý(options...¨

           Where,
           infile   = Name of file to read auxtrace printout from.
           options  = DETAIL - Include hex data for each record.
                      XML    - Create xml file from input file.
                      HTML   - Create HTML file wrapper for SVG.
                               This allows you to scroll the SVG
                               in Internet Explorer.
                      EVENT  - Process input EVENT trace records.
                      DATA   - Process input DATA trace records.
                      To negate any of the above options, prefix
                      the option with NO. For example, NOHTML.
                      xx     - One or more 2-letter domain names
                               that you want to process. The
                               default is all trace domains and
                               can be much slower. For example,
                               to show socket activity you would
                               specify PG and SO.

EXAMPLE  - 1. To investigate a socket programming problem:

              AUX2SVG auxtrace.txt (PG SO DETAIL XML

              This will create the following files:
                auxtrace.svg  - SVG representation of trace.
                auxtrace.html - HTML to scroll the SVG.
                auxtrace.xml  - XML representation of trace.


MEMBERS  - The list of members in the distribution PDS are:

           $$$DOC   - This file.
           GPL      - The GNU General Public License.
           AUX2SVG  - The Rexx source code (including FILE647 parser).
           RUNJOB   - JCL to run AUX2SVG in batch.

INSTALL  - 1. Copy AUX2SVG to your Rexx library.

           2. Run a job to print a CICS auxilliary trace file to a
              sequential (or partitioned) dataset (RECFM=VBA).

           3. You can now either:
              a. Run AUX2SVG in batch on the mainframe, or
              b. Download your auxilliary trace print file to a PC
                 and run AUX2SVG on the PC (using Regina Rexx).
              Option 'b' is better as it uses cheaper CPU cycles.

           4. If you want to run AUX2SVG on the mainframe, then read
              on...
              In TSO (or batch), execute the AUX2SVG rexx procedure
              specifying the name of the print dataset to process
              and the CICS domains that you want to visualize:

              TSO AUX2SVG MY.AUX.FILE (PG SO

              If you supply any options, be sure to put a space before
              the opening parenthesis. A closing parenthesis is
              optional.

           5. This will create the following datasets (or members):

              MY.AUX.FILE.HTML   - HTML code for scrolling the SVG
              MY.AUX.FILE.SVG    - Scalable Vector Graphics XML data

              If you specified a partitioned dataset member in 2,
              called xxx say, then the AUX2SVG rexx will create
              members in the same partitioned dataset called:

              xxxHTM             - HTML code for scrolling the SVG
              xxxSVG             - Scalable Vector Graphics XML data

           6. Download the HTML and SVG files to your PC and open
              either in Internet Explorer (with the Adobe SVG Viewer
              plugin installed).  You will have to adjust the file
              name in the HTML file to reference the SVG file.

MORE INFO  - See the AUX2SVG rexx procedure for more information

NOTES      - 1. The AUX2SVG rexx procedure uses the Rexx XML parser
                in CBTTAPE FILE647 (www.cbttape.org).

AUTHOR     - Andrew J. Armstrong <andrew_armstrong@unwired.com.au>

----------------------------END OF $$$DOC-------------------------------
