Notes concerning the SVCTAB program.

Initial changes:  Late December, 2012.

1.  The program, as originally coded, did not adequately display the
    SVC program entry point addresses.  The whole 4 bytes was not
    displayed.  I changed that, and displayed the entire address,
    including the high-order bit which says whether the addressing
    mode is 24 or 31.  If you actually display this address using
    a core-browsing program such as LOOK from CBT Tape File 264,
    the high-order bit will be ignored anyway.

    Previously, the way the program was coded, you would sometimes
    miss real bits in the high-order part of the entry point address,
    and as a result, you could not find the real entry point of the
    module.  (No good.)

2.  24-bit AMODE was not marked as such, but the field was left blank.
    It is much clearer to mark the module as AMODE 24 specifically,
    so the SVCTAB program now displays that.

First group of notes:  S.GOLOB  -  January 13, 2013.

1.  This program is nearly identical to the DSVC program in CBT
    File 300, at least in origin.  It came from the CBT disassembler
    on File 217, as did the DSVC program.

2.  This program has been adjusted by Sam Golob in several ways:

    A.  Missing SVC's have been marked with an "entry point address"
        saying IGCERROR, so that it is obvious that this SVC has not
        been installed on the running system.  The address of the
        IGCERROR program in the Nucleus is shown once, at the top of
        the SVCTAB display.

    B.  An invocation of the NUCLKUP macro was done, to determine the
        entry point of the IGCERROR module, before any SVC table
        lookups are done.  That way, each entry point in an SVC table
        entry can be compared with the entry point of IGCERROR and
        you can easily determine if that SVC is missing or not.

    C.  If the entry point in the table coincides with the entry point
        of IGCERROR, then the "purpose" field of that SVC is marked
        'RESERVED', always.  This is the --NAME-- field.

    D.  The "purpose" field (or the --NAME-- field) of the SVC
        display is filled in from the COPY member called DISASM3B.
        I have adjusted most of the "user SVC" numbers in this table
        to show a blank entry.  Different shops have different user
        SVC numbers.  I left the two CICS SVC entries intact, just
        to show you how to code the entries in this table.

        Some new IBM SVC's have been introduced with z/OS recent
        system levels.  I adjusted the DISASM3B member to coincide
        with the latest IBM installed SVC's.  If a certain IBM SVC
        is not installed on your system, it will still be marked
        'RESERVED'.

    E.  Previous versions of this program did not use the current
        version of the IHASVC macro in SYS1.MODGEN.  There was a
        copied old version of IHASVC which was coded as an internal
        macro, in the program.  I changed the program to use IBM's
        IHASVC macro.  This required a few other adjustments.

    F.  The NUCLKUP macro does not need to be APF-authorized, so
        the SVCTAB program does not need to be APF-authorized.

