IBM announcements

For reasons best known to itself, IBM was apparently holding
back on us all when it first announced Version 3.4 of VTAM
last year, for in September of this year it disclosed the details
of some additional functions, which it had hitherto seen fit to
keep hidden under the covers.  Six new functions have been
revealed with particular emphasis on IBM's increasing
commitment to maximum system availability.

Quite clearly 'Succinct' wasn't the middle name of the person
who dreamt up the title of the Dynamic Network Access
Sample Configuration Services Exchange Identification (XID)
Exit.  The exit is supplied in a ready-to-run form or it can be
customized to meet specific installation standards.  The exit
makes it easier to add switched devices 'on the fly' and will be
warmly welcomed by network administrators.  Also making
their jobs easier is the newly-provided capability of making
dynamic, non-disruptive changes to the DLOGMOD
specifications of applications, independent and dependent LUs,
and cross-domain resources.  In a similar vein, customers can
now add the SEGMENT and LMODADR parameters for the
Link Problem Determination Aids (LPDA-2) facility and have
them passed on automatically to the NCP, obviating the need
for an NCPGEN.

Anybody who has ever grappled with the various VTAM,
SNA, and NCP manuals containing error messages or sense
codes will give their approval to the On-line Message Facility.
As well as providing speedy access to this information, users
can add their own text, incorporating, for example, details of
any recovery actions that need to be performed by the network
operator.

Another aspect of VTAM which benefits in this belated list of
goodies is security.  A new Command Verification Exit is
offered, which can be used to screen operator commands,
including those of programmed operators.  There is also
support for the LU6.2 Persistent Verification function: this
causes identification and password security information to be
validated once for a series of conversations rather than
individually for each separate conversation.

Also announced was ACF/NCP Version 6, although it won't be
generally available for another year.  It primarily establishes
support for the 3745, which in turn provides Ethernet Version 2
and IEEE 802.3 LAN connectivity.  In addition, ACF/NCP
Version 6 supports the attachment of a 3745 as a DTE to a
Frame Relay network.

Improvements have also been made in the area of network
management.  An alert will now be triggered if a virtual route
remains in the 'held' or 'congested' state for a pre-defined period
of time.  This problem with virtual routes, which is highlighted
in the article Virtual route monitor on page 12, has been a
source of irritation for some time.  Also, details of session
transmission priorities will be included in the data sent to NPM
allowing network usage to be assessed more accurately and
more equitable methods of chargeback to be implemented.



