3174 update

The 3174 is IBM's workhorse cluster controller and
functionally has changed very little over the years.  Perhaps the
most significant enhancements so far have been:

o      The Terminal Multiplexor Adapter (TMA) hardware to
      support multiplexors and so reduce cabling requirements.

o      The Response Time Monitor (RTM) hardware to provide
      performance monitoring data.

o      The Token Ring Adapter hardware to provide SNA
      gateway access to the mainframe for terminals attached to
      a token ring.

In SNA terms, the 3174 looks like a PU type 2.0 cluster
controller node, which means that it is dependent upon either a
PU type 4 (communications controller node containing
ACF/NCP) or a PU type 5 (host node containing a Systems
Services Control Point - SSCP - supported by ACF/VTAM or
possibly ACF/TCAM) to support session set-up and
communications between sessions.  PU type 2.0 nodes only
support a single link either to a communications controller node
for a remotely-attached 3174 or a host node for a locally-
attached (ie channel-attached) 3174.  PU type 2.0 nodes cannot
communicate with each other and therefore any nodes or
logical units connected to the 3174 can talk only to the
communications controller node or host node, which
effectively limits their access simply to host-based applications.
In this set-up it is not possible for intelligent devices in a token
ring network to communicate with other similar devices in
other token rings in the same SNA network, despite the fact
that they are architecturally capable and should be able to in
SNA.

Such intelligent nodes are PU type 2.1 devices, which have the
capability of establishing LU-to-LU sessions between nodes
(terminals, PCs, etc) that they control and nodes controlled by
another PU type 2.1 with which they have a communications
link.  The PU type 2.1 control function is known as the Single
Node Control Point (SNCP), which is a subset of the host-
based SSCP.  Perhaps the key difference between SNCP and
SSCP is that the SNCP has knowledge of only the local
physical network, not the entire network.  PU type 2.1 is
supported by such devices as PCs and AS/400s but the
stumbling block to their directly communicating with each
other without having to go through the host has been the 3174.
However, IBM has recently announced one of its ambiguously
named Request for Price Quotations (RPQs) - perhaps more
correctly termed a 'chargeable optional extra' - which
addresses this restriction.  PU2.1 Passthrough RPQ, together
with new 3174 configuration support software, causes the 3174
to act as a routing device between two communicating PU type
2.1 nodes.  The 3174 still continues to act as a PU type 2.0 but
does not interfere with the PU type 2.1 traffic.  Support for the
enhancement requires at least ACF/VTAM 3.2 and ACF/NCP
5.2, both of which support PU type 2.1.

This move is a small piece of the jigsaw in implementing
Advanced Peer to Peer Networking (APPN), which uses LU6.2
and PU2.1 and no doubt is just the first of many
communications device upgrades to come.  Full details are not
yet available of exactly how this upgrade is going to function.
The purpose of this update is to make network planners aware
that there are (overdue) developments in this vital area of SNA.
LU6.2 and PU2.1 are the main areas of SNA development and
activity at present both in and outside of IBM.  Keep reading
SNA Update for further details.

Brian Alford
Systems Consultant
Aranda (UK)

