Tuning VTAM and NCP data flows

The flow of data between ACF/VTAM and a channel-attached
front-end processor running ACF/NCP is greatly affected by
the parameters chosen in the VTAM start-up and NCPGEN
decks. In particular, the choice of values for IOBUF
(subparameters), DELAY, and MAXBFRU parameters will
affect the number of CPU cycles, channel program read/writes,
and quantity of storage used by VTAM.

Specific recommendations are almost impossible since values
are dependent directly upon the type, size, and volume of data,
which will obviously vary greatly from system to system. It is
for this reason that these parameters are still user-specified.
This article will attempt to offer some guidelines to assist in
chosing values for the key parameters and determining whether
the values chosen are correct.

Buffer pools used for I/O operations between VTAM and an
NCP are specified at start-up in the ATCSTR00 member of the
dataset specified by the VTAMLST DD card on the VTAM
start procedure:

      IOBUF=(baseno,bufsize,slowpt,F,xpanno,xpanpt)

where baseno specifies the initial number of buffers to be
allocated by VTAM during start-up, bufsize specifies the size
of the buffer to be used for I/O operations, slowpt specifies the
point (number of free buffers) at which VTAM is to enter slow-
down mode, xpanno specifies the number of pages to be added
to the VTAM buffer pool by an expansion operation to be used
for buffers, and xpanpt specifies the number of free buffers
below which VTAM is to initiate a buffer expansion.

Selection of values for the I/O buffer pool will affect not only
the usage of the storage allocated to the buffers but could also
have some impact on VTAM CPU usage. When a message (or
PIU) is either to be sent to an NCP or is being read from the
NCP, it is assembled in as many I/O buffers as necessary.
Choosing an optimum size is therefore potentially a case of
painstaking measurement of message sizes for your particular
system.

However, as will be explained later, this can be simplified by a
process of trial, monitoring, and refinement. Buffer size is
important. A large size will enable messages to be stored easily
but storage is wasted since VTAM dedicates buffers
exclusively and does not reuse any spare space. A small size
utilizes storage more efficiently but could result in frequent
buffer pool manipulations. Cycles of buffer pool expansions
and contractions consume CPU and can result in delays since
VTAM will not issue any reads to the NCP nor service any
application requests for queueing data during such activity. On
balance it is better to select too large a value (say the
maximum, 4096) unless storage constraint is a real problem,
bearing in mind that IOBUF is a fixed buffer pool and not in
pageable storage.

Referring back to the IOBUF parameter and sub-parameters,
VTAM initially allocates buffers according to the baseno value.
Once the number of free buffers falls below the value specified
by xpannt, VTAM will allocate an additional number of buffers
specified by the value of xpanno. Buffer usage and expansion
activity can be observed via the D NET,BFRUSE command
and trial and error may be sufficient to optimize the various
values.

A note of caution, however: xpanpt should be at least as large
as MAXBFRU for the NCP otherwise it is possible for each
interaction with the NCP to result in an expansion followed
immediately by a contraction. The consequences for
performance are obvious.

Before describing how to monitor and evaluate the data flow
between VTAM and NCP, a brief overview of channel
operations may be useful. 'Coat-tailing' is a method use by
VTAM to reduce the number of channel operation requests.
This simply means that once a channel operation has started,
messages can flow between VTAM and the NCP in either
direction by utilizing the active channel. This means that,
instead of messages being sent between VTAM and the NCP
immediately on being received, they can be queued and sent in
blocks at intervals specified by the NCP DELAY parameter.

When sending data to the NCP, VTAM issues a channel write
and appends a status modifier, which means that the NCP can
use the same channel operation to transfer data back to VTAM.
When the DELAY interval is reached and the NCP has data
waiting, it raises attention, which VTAM intercepts and issues
a read to allow the data to flow.

A simple method of assessing the values of the key tuning
parameters can be developed by collecting tuning statistics.
VTAM collection of tuning statistics is activated by including
the TNSTAT parameter in the VTAM start-up parameters
(member ATCSTR00 on the dataset specified by the
VTAMLST DD card in the VTAM start-up procedure), for
example:

      TNSTAT,CNSL|NOCNSL,TIME=mm

Only the TNSTAT keyword is necessary. CNSL specifies that
the statistics are to be displayed on the operator console and
NOCNSL specifies that they are to be recorded. For MVS the
recording is to SMF, for VSE the recording is to the VTAM
trace file, and for VM the recording is to the TUNSTATS  file
on VTAM's A-disk. TIME specifies the recording interval in
minutes. The default is 60 minutes; a shorter period may not be
of much value since the period must be long enough to smooth
out the effect of PC file transfers and NJE transmissions.

The objective is to set key values to provide good performance
over an extended period, not to tune particular activities or
operations.

For a first analysis, it will probably be sufficient simply to note
down the console display either as it happens or by reviewing
the system log later. Recording statistics to a file is of use more
in watching for trends indicating changes in network traffic.
Also, it is likely that data will only be required for the short
'busy periods'. Once the tuning statistics have been gathered,
key values to be observed include:

o      ATTN - the number of attention interrupts raised by the
      NCP. The NCP raises an attention interrupt when there is
      data waiting to be sent to VTAM and no channel operation
      is active.

o      CHRD - the number of VTAM channel read programs executed.

o      CHWR - the number of VTAM channel write programs executed.

o      IPIU - the number of PIUs (messages) read from the NCP.

o      RDATTN - the number of read attentions raised by the
      NCP. This is a count of the  number of times a VTAM
      read operation failed to empty the waiting NCP buffers completely.

o      RDBUF - the number of VTAM buffers used for NCP data transfer.

o      SLODN - the number of times the NCP has entered slow
      down. This state is entered when the NCP buffer pool is
      nearly depleted and prevents acceptance of any further
      messages, either from the network or from VTAM.

The effectiveness of the values for the three key parameters,
IOBUF, MAXBFRU, and DELAY, can be assessed as
follows.


IOBUF

Compare the values for RDBUF and IPIU. If RDBUF is much
larger than IPIU (3 or 4 times, or more), IOBUF is too small.
A large number of buffers are being used in holding the
messages, which means that the messages are typically much
larger than the size specified by IOBUF. However, if the
values are about equal and the number of read attentions raised
by the NCP (RDATTN) is zero, the IOBUF is too large.

There are recommendations relating to how many I/O buffers a
typical message should occupy for optimum VTAM
performance, but a value between 3 and 8 is acceptable. The
effect of varying the value of IOBUF parameters can be
observed by displaying buffer usage and by using RMF to
measure the VTAM working set and fixed frame count.


MAXBFRU

MAXBFRU specifies the maximum number of buffers VTAM
will allocate for each read or write of NCP data and so
effectively sets a limit to the amount of data that is transferred
between NCP and VTAM during a channel operation. This
enables a balance to be struck between inbound and outbound
traffic and restricts the number of I/O buffers that will be used.

If the number of buffers actually used (RDBUF) is significantly
less than MAXBFRU multiplied by CHRD (the number of
VTAM channel reads), then MAXBFRU is too large. This
would also be indicated if the number of read attentions raised
by the NCP (RDATTN) is zero. Too small a MAXBFRU value
would be indicated by a large value for RDATTN. This implies
that, at frequent intervals, not all the data was transferred from
NCP to VTAM during a VTAM read and that NCP was forced
to append a read attention to request VTAM to issue another
read for the remaining data. The data still remaining in the
NCP buffers will be experiencing a significant delay and
VTAM will not handle any application-generated requests until
the second read has completed.


DELAY

If a significant number of NCP slow-downs has been recorded
(ie SLODN > 0) then the DELAY value in the NCP is too
large. If the number of attention interrupts raised by the NCP
(ATTN) is significantly greater than the number of channel
reads actually raised by VTAM (CHRD) then the DELAY
value is too small.

Ideally the raising of attention by NCP should be avoided since
intercepting and processing of the attention by VTAM is
inefficient and time-consuming. However, increasing the value
of DELAY to achieve this would significantly degrade NCP
throughput.

A further effect of the DELAY parameter can be seen by
comparing the values of OPIU (the number of PIUs sent by
VTAM to the NCP) and CHWR (the number of channel write
operations initiated). If OPIU is significantly larger than
CHWR then VTAM is blocking and so delaying messages.
Blocking requires VTAM to consume CPU performing
unproductive work.

A DELAY value should be set such that the number of VTAM
write operations issued keeps pace with the rate at which
messages are being queued by applications. A balance must be
struck between the optimum value for DELAY for NCP and
the optimum value for DELAY for VTAM. Determination of
this is a complex process which involves measuring the
inbound and outbound message (PIU) rates and calculating the
optimum number of channel operations (CHRD and CHWR) to
process the traffic. The trade-off is whether the cumulative
delay for a group of messages is less than the channel operation
required to process each message individually.

If DELAY is set to zero then each message will require a
channel operation (ie OPIU=CHWR and IPIU=CHRD), which
is obviously not very efficient. Introducing a delay forces
messages to queue for, at most, the period of the delay, and
results in a decrease in channel operations but greater
throughput for each operation.

Unfortunately, the picture is not quite this simple because of
the 'coat-tailing' activity, which decreases the elapsed time for
some channel operations. A value of 0.2 seconds is generally
found to be a good starting point. Decreasing this would enable
the NCP to process messages faster but will increase the
channel activity generated by VTAM. Increasing the delay
value would decrease the channel activity but increase
queueing times, which would have a direct impact on response
times. The effect of varying the value for DELAY can be
observed by monitoring channel activity using RMF.

Remember that these notes are only a guide: there are complex
relationships between the parameters and they will need to be
examined in parallel, not just in isolation.

Although this article has been written specifically to address
VTAM-NCP channel operations, NetView statistics gathering
routines and bulk data transmission software (NJE, BDT etc)
may have an effect on VTAM buffer usage and should not be
discounted in arriving at the final parameter values.

To summarize, varying the values of IOBUF, MAXBFRU, and
DELAY will affect the throughput across the channel between
VTAM and NCP and so have a direct impact on network
response times. Begin by looking at RMF II and III. Assuming
that the overall system is not stressed, problems with the values
of these parameters is implied if VTAM is experiencing
processor or storage delays, has a large fixed frame count, or if
channel activity is high. Activate VTAM tuning statistics
collection and check the various key values using the
guidelines above.

A final note of caution: collecting VTAM tuning statistics
introduces some VTAM and NCP overheads and so should
only be used for brief sampling. To deactivate the recording
enter the command:

      F NET,NOTNSTAT

Collection can be restarted again by entering:
      F NET,TNSTAT,CNSL=YES


Brian Alford
Systems Consultant
Aranda (UK)

