Recent APPN announcements

IBM has recently pushed APPN very much to the forefront of
its enterprise networking strategy with a rash of product
announcements and official statements of direction, even going
so far as describing APPN as an architecture in its own right
rather than a mere extension to SNA. APPN made its debut in
June 1986 but, until now, has been confined mainly to the
AS/400 and PS/2. Its appearance in the mainframe arena
increases its importance considerably and it cries out to be
taken seriously.

IBM is pushing APPN as a powerful protocol that operates
across  both pure IBM and multi-vendor networks. APPN
offers routing, networking, and directory mechanisms which
monitor and manage network resources. Its dynamic, peer-to-
peer oriented nature allows it to greatly improve system and
application availability, reduce network outages, and increase
end-user productivity.


NEW VERSION OF ACF/VTAM

Probably the most significant of IBM's recent networking
announcements was the list of enhancements planned for the
MVS/ESA version of ACF/VTAM. Support is promised which
would allow VTAM nodes and VTAM/NCP composite nodes
to be dynamic participants in an APPN network and provide
access to mainframe servers from applications distributed on
other APPN environments as well as enabling use of the SNA
backbone as a transport between APPN nodes.

The new VTAM will include support for end node, network
node, and central directory server. There will also be support
for dependent  LUs in APPN and the integration of APPN and
subarea networks. All the APIs of the new VTAM would be
upwardly compatible with those of Version 3.


OPEN APPN

IBM also proffers APPN as an 'open' protocol by licensing its
APPN network node specifications to vendors who want to
include their routers in APPN networks. Novell Inc, 3Com
Corporation, Network Equipment Technologies Inc, and
Systems Strategies Inc are among the first to take up this offer.
Cisco Systems Inc is a notable absentee although IBM claims
that the two companies are in discussions. Openness is given a
further boost with IBM's promises to support SNA, OSI,
TCP/IP, NetBIOS, and IPX traffic transparently on networks
by interposing yet another layer of software - the Common
Transport Semantics Layer - between the network and the
application.


OTHER APPN ANNOUNCEMENTS

Other important APPN-related announcements made by IBM
include:

o      A planned new version of NetView for MVS/ESA and
      MVS/XA. New functions would include a dynamic
      graphical display of APPN topology, remote and
      automated operations for distributed APPN nodes, and the
      centralized collection of APPC accounting information.

o      A new product, Network Services/DOS, which allows
      DOS and Windows applications to access APPN resources
      via LU6.2 without incurring the massive memory overhead
      that currently applies.

o      A promise to provide improved APPN support for the
      RS/6000 through AIX SNA Services/6000, a program that
      runs with AIX 3.2.

o      IBM's intention to offer international APPN support on its
      Information Network by increasing the managed
      networking capabilities of its Network Services product.

o      IBM has announced its intention to extend the
geographical
      scope of the 6611 multi-protocol router (currently only
      destined for North America and Japan) to other countries,
      but has not elaborated on the where or when.


CONCLUSION

IBM seems to have pulled together a set of program
specifications, statements of direction, and actual applications
and presented them as a complete networking strategy. Exactly
how much hard code all this represents, remains a matter of
speculation but, in the absence of so few firm delivery dates, it
is very unlikely to amount to much at this stage. Nevertheless,
IBM is making a bold (or is it desperate) bid to maintain its
dominant position in networking while at the same time bowing
to customer pressure in its support for mixed and peer-to-peer
networks.


