LAN to mainframe connectivity via APPN

SNA Update, Issue 4, December 1991, described the
enhancement to the 3174 to enable PU type 2.1 traffic to pass
through unimpaired. A new piece of the APPN jigsaw has now
been added with the announcement by IBM of the 3172. This
device connects directly to an IBM mainframe channel and
supports the attachment of a token ring. As such it is an
alternative to the 3745 and 3174 as a means of connecting a
token ring to the mainframe. A key difference is that the 3172
will connect not just token ring but all main local area network
protocols and hardware (Ethernet, PC Network, FDDI, and
MAP).

When attached by a 3172, the token ring appears to the
mainframe to be an SNA switched major node, that is a PU
type 2.0 and a set of associated LUs. There is nothing
significant or different about this. What is significant is that the
3172 will also support PU type 2.1: in other words, APPN.
This would indicate that it is not intended to put APPN support
into the 3174 Establishment Controller, the cheaper way of
connecting a token ring to a mainframe, but what about the
3745 which still awaits significant APPN announcements?

Price-wise the 3172 is not cheap, but it is considerably less
expensive than the 3745. This is significant since recent
ACF/NCP announcements suggest that new developments such
as APPN and X.25 Frame Relay may not be supported on older
communications controllers such as the 3725 and 3720. The
3172 therefore offers a cheaper alternative to the 3745 or
whatever may follow to replace this ageing device and a
replacement for locally-attached 3174s.

What is interesting about this announcement is that it is the
closest APPN has got to the mainframe. Low Entry
Networking has seen a series of announcements supporting
APPN. LEN implements APPN PU type 2.1 such that PS/2s
with OS/2 Extended Edition and Communications Manager are
able to establish sessions between themselves directly.
However, this does rely on the PS/2s being directly linked: if
they are not, it is back to the host for session establishment.

Recently announced is a new Systems Application Architecture
(SAA) product, Network Services/2, which runs under OS/2
Extended Edition on the PC and enables development of APPN
end nodes. Two PCs operating under NS/2, configured to
support an end node and running an APPN application, will be
able to communicate directly with each other, peer-to-peer,
over a LAN. These products all indicate that APPN has been
pitched initially to bring as much local area networking as
possible into the SNA world. The 3172 begins to extend this
APPN incorporation to the mainframe.

On paper the 3172 offers a bridge to allow high-level network
protocols (APPN, OSI, TCP/IP) to pass from the LAN to the
mainframe. It is not apparent whether the 3172s act as more
than a bridge and have full APPN network node capabilities
(dynamic connectivity, network management etc). If this is the
intention, what is missing is a remote version of the 3172.
Keep watching.

Brian Alford
Systems Consultant
Aranda (UK)



