
   This package consists of an IEFU83 SMF exit and several MPF exits.
   Assembler source is supplied in each case.

   This package represents an example of issuing messages to the log,
   consoles, and/or users from the IEFU83 SMF exit.  These messages
   can contain information from SMF records which is not usually
   available at run-time, without the need for any post-processing
   effort.

   The main function of this code is to report the I/O activity of
   a job in the job's own print output.  This is a very handy source
   of run-time characteristic information often of great value to
   programmers during debugging and testing.  The idea was that the
   I/O count for a file would be shown next to the relevant data set
   name and not just in a DD summary often produced by IEFACTRT SMF
   exits.

   The famous "I/O count zap" was an ideal solution because the
   information was supplied on existing printlines, so output volumes
   were not increased.  Alas, this is just one of many facilities
   no longer available to us since the dreaded OCO was introduced.

   MVS messages in the "job messages" data set provide the link
   between the devices and the DD name at allocation-time, and
   show the final disposition of the data set at deallocation-time.
   The messages of the IEFU83 exit, written at file-close-time, show
   the link between the DD name and the data set name, as well as
   showing the access method used, type of access, I/O count, the
   physical block size, and, where calculable, the approximate
   byte-transfer count.

   The variation of the '?' character in the U83?14I and U83?15I
   message-ids is for installations that are only interested in
   a subset of data sets (eg. only TAPE data sets, only non-VIO
   data sets, or only updated data sets).

   The MPFLST83 member contains sample statements for the "proper"
   distribution of these messages.  It is assumed that these messages
   would be unwelcome on the console, hence the MPF suppression.

   MSGJOBLG is used to keep U83021I off the SYSLOG.  If you want it
   on the SYSLOG then no exit is necessary for this message.
   MSGNOLOG is used to keep data set I/O messages from appearing
   on the job log.

   To keep U83?14I, U83?15I and U83064I from being written to the
   SYSLOG you will probably have to remove routecode 11 from the
   SYSLOG.  Routecode 11 is essential for these messages so that
   they go to the "job messages" data set.

   Remember, if you want the message but don't want the SMF record,
   change the SMF parameters to collect the record, and change the
   exit to delete the record.

                                    Greg Price,
                                                 16th December 1992.

   P.S.  The comments under FUNCTION in the MSGNOLOG source may seem
   confusing, but they ARE correct.

