                             Edit Macro PUT



Installation
============

Just copy the PUT exec to a CLIST or REXX library that is allocated
to your TSO session. There are no other execs or panels required.



Usage
=====

Use the PUT edit macro to paste lines from the dataset or pds member
currently being edited into another dataset or pds member.

You can specify the lines to be copied either by entering them with the
macro invocation, or by using the C, CC, M, or MM line commands.

If the pds member you specify does not exist, it will be created and the
lines will be pasted into the new member.

If the target pds member is in the same pds as the source member, you
can specify just the member name instead of having to enter the dataset
and member names. To tell the macro that the target name is a pds member
and not a dataset name, put a hyphen (-) immediately before the member
name.

There are two formats of the command. The first format is used when
you want to specify the lines to be copied when you enter the command.

FORMAT: PUT firstline lastline datasetname targetline

        where: firstline is the first line to be copied

               lastline  is the last  line to be copied

               datasetname is the name of the dataset or pds member
               to copy the lines into

               targetline is the line in the target dataset AFTER
               which the new lines will be pasted.


        EXAMPLES:


        PUT 1 10 my.dataset 50

        will copy lines 1 through 10 of the current dataset or member
        into my.dataset, and will paste them in afte line 10 of
        my.dataset


        PUT 20 50 my.pds(pdsmbr) 100

        will copy lines 20 through 50 of the current dataset or member
        into member PDSMBR of my.pds, and will paste them in after line
        100 of PDSMBR.


        PUT 20 50 my.pds(pdsmbr) 0

        will paste lines 20 through 50 of the current dataset or member
        into the beginning of PDSMBR, before the first line of the
        member.

        If the pds member you want to paste lines to is in the same pds
        as the member you're editing, you can specify just the member
        name in the command.


        PUT 1 10 -xyz 5

        will paste lines 1 through 10 of the current member into member
        XYZ, after line 5 of XYZ.


        PUT 20 50 -xyz 0

        will paste lines 20 through 50 of the current member into member
        XYZ, at the beginning of XYZ before line 1.


The second format of the command allows you to use the C and CC, and the
M and MM line commands to specify the lines to be copied.

In this format of the command you only enter the target dsn or member
name and the target line number. You specify the lines to be copied by
putting a C or CC, or an M or MM in the line command fields, like you do
with any other copy or paste command.

If you use C or CC, the lines are copied to the target dataset.

IF you use M or MM, the lines are copied to the target dataset then
deleted from the source dataset.


FORMAT: PUT datasetname targetline

        where: datasetname is the name of the dataset or pds member
               to copy the lines into

               targetline is the line in the target dataset AFTER
               which the new lines will be pasted

        All the other rules specified for the first format of the
        command apply.


        EXAMPLES:


        PUT my.dataset 10

        to copy a line or range of lines into my.dataset after line 10.


        PUT my.pds(pdsmbr) 50

        to copy a line or range of lines into member PDSMBR of my.pds
        after line 50 of PDSMBR.


        PUT -pdsmbr 25

        to copy a line or range of lines into member PDSMBR after line
        25. The use of the hyphen before the membername says that PDSMBR
        is a member of the same pds as the member currently being
        edited.


        PUT -pdsmbr 0

        to copy a line or range of lines into member PDSMBR. The lines
        will be pasted into the beginning of PDSMBR, before line 1.


Regardless of the format of the command the following rules apply:

If you use the first format of the command and you only want to copy
one line to the target dataset or member, just make the values for
firstline and lastline the same, like this: PUT 2 2 my.dataset 10

If the target is a pds member and it does not exist it will be created.
In the case of a new pds member, it doesn't matter what the value of
targetline is, as long as it's numeric.

IF the target dataset is a pds, and you enter just the dataset name
(my.pds) instead of the dataset and member name (my.pds(mymember))
a member listing of the pds will be displayed. Just use the SELECT line
command to select which member the lines of data are to be pasted into.

If the number specified for lastline is greater than the number of lines
in the source dataset or member, the whole dataset or member will be
copied.

If the number specified for targetline is greater than the number of
lines in the target dataset or member, the new lines will be pasted in
at the end of the target dataset or member.

If the number specified for targetline is 0, the new lines will be
pasted in at the beginning of the target dataset or member, before the
first line.

If the lines being copied are longer than the daaset or member they
are being pasted into, a message will be issued that warns of possible
data truncation.
