)F FUNCTION

     Echo the provided text to the terminal using PUTLINE.

     This allows the text to be captured using REXX OUTTRAP commands.

  The reason for this is that using the REXX SAY while the REXX OUTTRAP
  are active does not allow the text to be captured. Using EKKO resolves
  this challenge.

)X SYNTAX

     EKKO TEXT
     EKKO Text to be Displayed
     EKKO 'Text To Be Displayed
     EKKO 'TEXT To be displayed'

)O TEXT

 If no text is specified, a blank line is displayed.

 If the text begins with a quote then (1) the quote is removed
 and (2) an optional trailing quote, if present, will be removed.

 A trailing quote is only needed if the quoted text to be displayed
 has a trailing plus (+) or minus (-) because they normally
 indicate continuation of a command line.

 A trailing quote is needed in ispf outside a rexx exec or clist,
 if the text begins with a quote, as ispf checks for matched quotes.

 To display something with a leading quote, specify 2 leading quotes.
 quotes within a quoted string do not need to be doubled, unless
 the command is run in ispf outside a rexx exec or a clist.
 If they are doubled then they will be displayed as a single quote.

 Unquoted strings that are indented will display with leading spaces.

 Examples:
  ekko this is text
  ekko  this is text with a leading space
  ekko   this is text with 2 leading spaces
  ekko '  this is text with 2 leading spaces'
  ekko   '  this is text with 2 leading spaces'
  ekko it's text with a single quote
  ekko 'it's text with a single quote
  ekko 'it's text with a single quote'
  ekko 'it''s text with a doubled single quote'
  ekko 'this is text with a trailing hyphen -'
  ekko 'this is text with a trailing plus sign +'
  ekko 'this is text with no trailing quote needed
  ekko      (prints blank line)
  ekko '    (prints blank line)
  ekko ''   (prints blank line)
  ekko '''  (prints one quote)
  ekko '''' (prints one quote)

 A command with an uneven number of quotes, if entered within ispf
 and outside of a rexx exec or a clist, such as directly on panel 6,
 will be failed by ispf with this message:

  ISPD289  MISMATCHED QUOTES - THE STRING CONTAINS AN UNEVEN NUMBER
           OF QUOTES.

 There is rarely a need to run the 'ekko' command directly,
 outside a rexx exec or a clist, in ispf, except for testing,
 but message ISPD289 can be avoided by specifying pairs of quotes
 where one output quote is desired. so instead of these commands:

  ekko let's begin
  ekko 'let's begin'

 These commands will produce the same desired result:

  ekko let''s begin
  ekko 'let''s begin'

 The same is true inside a rexx exec or a clist, but not needed.
