CMD A
SHORT Move a display line after this line (see also M, B4).
WHERE  line prefix area
CMD ACT
SHORT Action the line as a sequence of ISPF commands
WHERE  line prefix area
CMD ADD ALLOC
SHORT Produce a list of all DDnames allocated to the ISPF session.
WHERE  command line
A scrollable list is produced of all DDnames allocated to the
session.
Command-line commands available are:
L <ddname> to line up to
one of the DDnames;
Prefix area commands
available are:
S to select a dataset name for permanent addition to the DDF display.
CMD ADD <prefix>
SHORT Produce a list of all datasets with the HLQ of <prefix>
WHERE  command line
A scrollable list is produced of all datasets with high level
qualifier of <prefix>.
Prefix area commands
available are: S to select a dataset name
for permanent addition to the DDF
display.
CMD B
SHORT Browse the data set
WHERE  line prefix area
If no member is provided, a member
list is produced. If a member is provided but does not exist,
it is used as a pattern; that is, a member list is provided
of all members
having names starting with the specified characters.
CMD B4
SHORT Move a display line before this line (see also M, A).
WHERE  line prefix area
A display line is moved Before the line with
B4 in the prefix area. B4 used so as not to cause confusion
with the B (Browse) prefix command.
CMD CANcel
SHORT End without saving the display
WHERE  command line
CMD CO
SHORT Copy the specified member (see also MO, OV, TO)
WHERE  line prefix area
Copy this member. If used with OV, wil overlay the target member
if it exists. If used with TO, will not copy
if the target member already exists.
CMD COMP
SHORT compress this data set
WHERE  line prefix area
CMD CPN
SHORT Compare function, new data set (See also CPO, NEW, OLD).
WHERE  line prefix area
Note that if the same member name is to be used for
CPN or CPO, it need only be entered in one.
CMD CPO
SHORT Compare function, old data set (See also CPN, NEW, OLD).
WHERE  line prefix area
Note that if the same member name is to be used for
CPN or CPO, it need only be entered in one.
CMD D
SHORT Delete this row (no Dn facility is provided)
WHERE  line prefix area
D does not delete any following hidden lines;
each line must be deleted
individually.
CMD DEL
SHORT Delete a member of a data set.
WHERE  line prefix area
The member is deleted and a message is issued.
CMD E
SHORT Edit the dataset (see also B).
WHERE  line prefix area
Edit the data set. If no member is provided, a member
list is produced. If a member is provided but does not exist,
it is created.
CMD Find
SHORT From DDF display: Find <name> <type>. Find member within DDF type.
WHERE  command line
Check if member <name> is present on
any of the data sets of type <type>. You might have type SC
for all Script datasets so F FRED SC would search
only the type SC data sets for the member FRED.
Only those data sets where <name> was found
remain on the display. ISPF stats are displayed wherever the member
is found. PF3 sends the display back to  the normal DDF screen.
Note that DDF searches all the datasets of the type
specified, irrespective of whether they are migrated by HSM or not.
If you search a lot of migrated datasets, response time will go up.
CMD Heads
SHORT Show only the first line of each of the Show fields.
WHERE  command line
All lines are excluded other than the first
in each Show group.
This has the effect of minimising the display.
See also the SH and HI line commands.
CMD HI
SHORT Hide following lines that have the same Show field (See also SH).
WHERE  line prefix area
This commands hides all subsequent lines with the same Show
field as the one on which the HI is entered.
CMD In
SHORT Insert n lines
WHERE  line prefix area
CMD M
SHORT Move this line (see also A, B4).
WHERE  line prefix area
If you move a line to
after a line with a different Show field, the line moved changes
to match the one after which it has moved.
CMD ML
SHORT Provide full member list (see also E and B).
Provide a member list for the data set.
ML always provides a full list of the members of a data set,
ie. the member field is ignored.
If a template dataset is present, its members are also listed.
Within member list, the prefix commands E (edit) B (browse) R (rename)
DELETE and EX (Execute) are available. E <membername> or B <membername>
can be entered on the command line.
CMD MO
SHORT Move a member to another dataset (see also CO, OV and TO)
WHERE  line prefix area
If used with OV, will overlay
any target member, if used with TO will not overlay the target if
it already exists.
CMD OV
SHORT Target of MO (move) or CO (copy, see also TO)
WHERE  line prefix area
If the to member is not specified, the name
will be the same as on the From data set.
If the member already exists it will be overwritten.
CMD LA
SHORT List all allocated datasets.
WHERE  command line
Command line commands available:
F <membername> <ddname> to find a member
within one of the allocated DDnames.
All occurrences
are shown, with their ISPF stats;
L <ddname> to
Line the display up against the specified DDname
Prefix commands available:
B to browse a member.
Only valid after F command
Use PF3 to return to the normal DDF display.
CMD MRG
SHORT Invoke SuperC compare (extended) where this is the result version
WHERE  prefix area
This command makes the specified dataset made known to the
extended SuperC dialog as the target for the Merge operation. This
parameter is optional.
CMD NEW
SHORT Invoke SuperC compare (extended) where this is the new version
(See also OLD, CPN, CPO)
WHERE  prefix area
This command makes the specified dataset made known to the
extended SuperC dialog as the New dataset. Use the extended SuperC
dialog when you want to select the compare columns or if you
want to merge two files to create a third.
CMD OLD
SHORT Invoke SuperC compare (extended) where this is the old version
(See also NEW)
WHERE  prefix area
This command makes the specified dataset made known to the
extended SuperC dialog as the New dataset. Use the extended SuperC
dialog when you want to select the compare columns or if you
want to merge two files to create a third.
CMD Reset
SHORT Show all lines on the DDF display.
WHERE  command line
CMD Rn
SHORT Repeat n rows
WHERE  line prefix area
CMD SH
SHORT Show following lines with the same Show field value(See also HI).
WHERE  line prefix area
CMD SHow <list>
SHORT Select which Show values are to be displayed
WHERE  command line
<list> contains a list of Show values. Each display line is
shown where it has a Show value on the list.
This is a method of showing only selected lines.
To reset the display use either Reset or Heads commands.
CMD ST
SHORT Display ISPF stats for the selected member.
WHERE  line prefix area
This avoids having to
get a member list to see that information.
You can type UPDATE to change the stats.
CMD SUB
SHORT Submit the member, or complete dataset, as an MVS job
WHERE  line prefix area
No check is made to ensure that what is submitted is correct JCL.
CMD SORT <heading>
SHORT Sort the table by one of the headings.
WHERE  command line
CMD TEMPL
SHORT View list of template libraries,
WHERE  command line
The template libraries are included whenever an Edit is done
within DDF on a dataset with the approriate Type.
When you type copy <member> on the ISPF command line,
both the dataset being edited and the template library are searched.
Frequently needed items can be kept on the template library for
easy copying when needed.
You will note that the template library members are also listed
when you select a member list. They can be identified by the level
number under the 'lib' heading being greater than 1.
The member names in the template libraries supplied with DDF all
start with Z.
CMD TO
SHORT Target of MO (move) or CO (copy, see also OV)
WHERE  line prefix area
Used with MO (move) or CO (copy) to specify the target data set.
If the to member is not specified, the name
will be the same as on the From data set. The Copy/Move is not done if
the member already exists.
CMD X
SHORT Exclude the line from the display.
WHERE  line prefix area
CMD 3.1 or 31
SHORT Invoke the standard 3.1 utility with the DSN filled in.
WHERE  line prefix area
CMD 3.2 or 32
SHORT Invoke the standard 3.2 utility with the DSN filled in.
WHERE  line prefix area
CMD 3.3 or 33
SHORT Invoke the standard 3.3 utility with the From DSN filled in.
WHERE  line prefix area
Use in conjunction with TO to get the To DSN filled in as well.
CMD 3.4 or 34
SHORT Invoke the standard 3.4 utility using the data set prefix provided.
WHERE  line prefix area
If you enter 3.4 n where n is in the range 1-4 this provides the
level at which 3.4 is to be provided. So if the dataset is
AA.BB.CC.DD then 3.4 1 will do a 3.4 of all AA data sets
3.4 2 of all AA.BB data sets, and so on. 4 is the maximium level
allowed. Entering 3.4 n where less than n qualifiers exist will
cause a 3.4 error.
CMD 3.14 or 314
SHORT Invoke the SuperC find panel with the DSN filled in.
WHERE  line prefix area
