Controlling multiple MVS test systems

At any one time in our installation we will have at least two test systems
active.  In an effort to control these ever-changing systems and reduce
duplication of effort and resources the method described in this article was
evolved.


NOMENCLATURE

We have two 3090 Model 200 mainframes.  One runs our production work, the other
our development work.  The production system is known as Level 1 (LVL1), the
development system as Level 2 (LVL2).  The SYSRES volumes associated with these
levels are RES100 and RES200, respectively.  The numbers indicate the level and
generation of the SYSRES.  For example, RES100 is the LVL1 generation 0 SYSRES.
LVL3 and LVL4 are left for expansion, leaving our test systems to start at LVL5.
Our oldest testing system will be known as LVL5, and this will be the test
system used to apply maintenance for our live systems.  LVL6 onwards will be
complete upgrades in progress via CBIPO or CBPDO.

Common to all test systems is a volume CAT500, the contents of which are
described below.  Originally, the volume was the catalog volume for LVL5 only,
hence the name, but it has now expanded to fill the function detailed below.


TEST SYSTEM ENVIRONMENT

Each test system consists of a SYSRES and a DLIB volume, in our case 3380 disks.
The SYSRES name will reflect the development level, eg CBIPO 86C yields a SYSRES
RES86C.  The SYSRES consists of system target libraries plus the SMPE target
zone associated with the system.  The DLIB volume contains the distribution
libraries and the SMPE distribution zone associated with this system.  Again the
disk name reflects the level, eg  DLB86C.

Wherever possible the High Level Qualifier (HLQ) of a library will also reflect
the level it belongs to, eg  DCF86C.  This provides a quick and easy method of
identification.  These names can be allocated for all libraries using the CBIPO
job SYMUPDT.  This convention cannot be used for libraries that must have the
HLQ SYS1, but these will all reside on the SYSRES, and can be easily identified
by their position.  Program products can be included in the MVS zones, or can
have separate zones.  Their target libraries will reside on the SYSRES and their
DLIBs on the DLIB volume.

To IPL any test system requires only two disks - a SYSRES and CAT500 (described
below).  This two pack system can also be used in an emergency if access to the
live systems is impossible.  Of the two test systems, one will be used to apply
maintenance to the live systems, and the other will be a complete upgrade in
progress via CBIPO or CBPDO.


CAT500

In conjunction with these dynamic volumes there is CAT500.  This volume contains
the following:

SYS1.LOGREC
SYS1.DUMPxx
SYS1.HASPACE
SYS1.HASPCKPT
SYS1.HASPINDX            - SDSF     (see JES)
SYS2.HASPACE             - optional (see JES)
SYS2.HASPCKPT            - optional (see JES)
SYS2.HASPINDX            - optional (see JES)
SYS1.MLPALIB
SYS1.BRODCAST
SYS1.MANx
SYS1.PROCLIB
SYS1.PARMLIB
ICFM.CAT500                   - Master Catalog
PAG1.PLPA.CAT500         - PLPA page dataset
PAG2.COMMON.CAT500  - common page dataset
PAG3.LOCAL.CAT500        - local/swap page dataset
ZAA1.GLOBAL.CSI          - SMPE Global Zone
ZAA1.SMPPTS              - SMPE PTS
SYS1.JESLOAD             - JES load library

This list is not a definitive one and will vary according to each installation's
needs.

Thus this volume contains the 'non-dynamic' elements of an MVS system (JES is
discussed below).  This cuts down the development time of new systems, and means
that tasks that held us back before, such as defining PARMLIB, building
catalogs, and building BRODCAST on each new SYSRES have been eliminated.
Therefore, as soon as the main SYSGEN has been done on a new system we are in a
position to IPL, with a better than average chance of coming up.  Also each new
system will, from its first IPL, be customised for our installation, eliminating
a high proportion of common development errors such as 047 abends, catalog
abends etc.  Other advantages of this arrangement are centralisation of control,
and reduction of maintenance.  Having one set of SMF datasets provides a
constant audit trial that can be incorporated into housekeeping jobs, satisfying
installation inspection demands.  If individual systems need to be identified
different SMFPRMxx members can be used.

A common PARMLIB provides centralised control and simplified maintenance.
However, within each PARMLIB multiple IEASYSxx members can be used to allow
different system parameters for different systems if required.  Alternatively,
individual members like IEAAPFxx or SMFPRMxx can be used at IPL time, eg R
00,SYSP=6C, or R 00,APF=6C,SMF=6C.


CATALOG

We use ICF catalogs, and all our test systems run from one Master Catalog,
ICFM.CAT500.  We can do this because datasets on a SYSRES may be catalogued as
being on volume '******' and unit '****'.  These datasets are then picked up
from the IPL volume.  Therefore, all SYSRES sited datasets can be catalogued in
this fashion.  As mentioned above, DLIB datasets will contain a level identifier
as part of their HLQ and be uniquely catalogued.  The same applies to program
product datasets.


GLOBAL ZONE

We have one Global Zone and PTS for all systems and products.  CAT500 is the
ideal place for the SMPE Global Zone and the PTS.  Placing them here keeps them
from using space on live volumes and decreases any risk of accidental damage.
It means that the testing systems are self-contained and can be regarded as a
third 'entity' alongside production and development systems.


JES

We choose to upgrade our JES (JES2) separately from MVS to simplify the
implementation of both, and keep the problems separate.  Thus when a new MVS is
being developed we will have a proven JES to use, and vice versa.  A copy of our
current JES load library will reside on CAT500 and be brought in via a STEPLIB
DD statement in the JES2 procedure, giving each system the same JES.  Spool can
be shared amongst all systems, or two spools can be defined (SYS1.HASPACE/
SYS2.HASPACE) and rotated as needed.  To view and control data on spool, SDSF
(program number 5798-DWX) can be used.  One SYSx.HASPINDX must be defined for
each HASPACE.


MIGRATION

When a test system has been verified to our satisfaction, we will begin its
migration to LVL2 (development) and, ultimately, to LVL1 (production).  When we
try a new system as our development system, an intermediate SYSRES - RES201
(LVL2 generation 1) is built.  This enables us to move between current and new
systems by only doing a CLPA, thus avoiding cumbersome back-out procedures.

Once satisfied that the RES201 system can handle our development workload the
production workload is transferred to the RES201 system and run for a period of
operational proving.  If this proves satisfactory, another SYSRES - RES101 is
built, this being a copy of RES201.  Once built the production workload reverts
back to it.

During the period of implementation both production and development systems can
be returned to the down-level systems, independently, merely by IPLing, thus
providing immediate back-out in an emergency, which is an over-riding
consideration in our environment.

After the new systems have been accepted, RES201 and RES101 are copied to RES200
and RES100 respectively and then freed to the disk pool.  At this point the test
system just implemented migrates from LVL6/7/8 to become the oldest testing
system LVL5, superseding all others.  It is now in step with the live systems
and can be used to apply service.


POINTS TO WATCH

In a shared PARMLIB, IEAAPFxx can grow to an enormous size.  Therefore, after a
test system is dropped we try to remove all unnecessary references from PARMLIB,
especially IEAAPFxx.

Similarly, the catalog has to be weeded periodically, if for no other reason
than to keep the hardcopy list to a reasonable size.

After a testing session we try to recover any LOGREC and dump dataset
information immediately.  This keeps these datasets from filling up and ensures
that the information is not over-written.



Stephen Kell
Systems Programmer
Bank of Scotland (UK)    © Stephen Kell 1987





















