The benefits of System Managed Storage (SMS)

This article will be of use to installations that are planning to
go to IBM's System Managed Storage (SMS) in the future, or
to those that have so far remained uncommitted.

To implement SMS, an installation requires MVS/ESA
(although it will work on MVS/XA with the correct level of
DFP and fixes) and at least HSM (or a competing product
performing data migration and back-ups). RACF (or CA-
ACF2, CA-TOP SECRET etc) would be nice to have, but is
not required specifically for SMS.

Sooner or later most installations will want to exploit the
benefits of SMS. First, the SMS software is free - it is part of
DFP; secondly, it is a safe bet that IBM will introduce new
storage functions within the framework of SMS, so that only
those who have implemented SMS will be able to benefit.


SO WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS OF SMS?

While most of the benefits are for storage administrators, SMS
also helps end users who allocate disk datasets.

Some of the main reasons for going to SMS are discussed
below. But keep in mind that SMS offers a great deal of
flexibility and it is up to the installation to plan and prepare for
whatever function they wish to exploit.

Centralized disk control

Under SMS, an installation can exercise total control over all
dataset allocations. This is a significant step. In the past, the
storage administrator had to employ a variety of means to
achieve correct dataset placement, such as user exits, security
software, a considerable amount of manual 'volume clean-up'
effort, and of course, the good faith of users.

With SMS, the storage administrator can, by means of
Automatic Class Selection (ACS) routines, intercept all
allocations and automatically direct them to correct volumes,
based on installation requirements and standards.

Device independence

In an SMS environment, the users are freed from having to
know physical volume characteristics such as track sizes and
tracks per cylinder. They only need to know about the logical
requirements, such as the size of their records and the number
of records they want to store.

JCL simplification

End users, especially new ones, will benefit from simplified
JCL. They will no longer have to specify JCL parameters such
as VOLUME, UNIT, DCB, and even SPACE. These can be
inserted (or defaulted) by the ACS routines of SMS.

New JCL features

New JCL keywords such as MGMTCLAS and STORCLAS
allow end users to specify logical dataset requirements simply
and efficiently.

For example, under SMS, end users can specify whether they
want extra back-ups for some of their critical datasets, or if
they want better disk performance for selected datasets.

Of course, an installation will need to use RACF (or another
security product) to prevent misuse of these new facilities.

Easier device conversion

In the past, whenever disk devices with different geometry
were introduced (eg 3350s, 3380s, 3390s), the storage
administrator, and to some extent the end users, were faced
with a conversion effort. In many cases, data had to be
reblocked to optimize the new storage space.

Under SMS, since the user is freed from having to know
physical disk characteristics, it is easier to introduce new
device geometries. In fact, the whole process can be made
transparent to end users.

Volume pooling

The benefits of volume pooling are obvious.

o      Data is more evenly distributed on available volumes

o      There are fewer out-of-space instances

o      Disaster recovery is simpler

o      Performance is more predictable, and so on.

But only a storage administrator can appreciate the amount of
work required to keep volume pools from being contaminated
by the wrong type of data.

SMS provides easy ways to implement volume pooling. What's
more, the pooling can be enforced. Allocation on a wrong pack
can be re-directed to another volume, or even failed!

ABARS

Aggregate Backup and Recovery System (ABARS) is a dataset
back-up and restore feature, intended for disaster recovery. It
allows an installation to back up groups, or aggregates, of
datasets. To implement ABARS, SMS is required.

Better disk management

While HSM - and competing products - provide some measure
of automatic dataset management (back-up and migration),
SMS can do it better. HSM does it at the volume level, SMS
can do it at the dataset level.

Storage administrators have always wanted answers to
questions such as these:

o      How can groups of datasets be migrated directly to tape
      after they have been inactive for a specified number of days?

o      Is there a way to ensure some datasets never get
migrated?

o      Can they be automatically deleted if not used for x number
      of years?

o      Can critical datasets be backed up more often?

SMS has the answers to these questions and many more.

New features

Some new features can be exploited only in an SMS
environment.

For example, PDSEs can reside only on SMS-managed
volumes.

Uncatalogued datasets have always been a problem. They can
cause confusion or even errors in processing. SMS simply does
not allow uncatalogued datasets to be created.

Dinesh Dattani
Independent Consultant (Canada)                         c Dinesh Dattani 1992

