The VTOC environment and CVAF
With the introduction of Data Facility/Device Support (DF/DS) and its successor
Data Facility Product (DFP), the ability to process a DASD VTOC was enhanced by
a component known as the Common VTOC Access Facility (CVAF).  CVAF provided an
alternative method to VTOC access beyond the old data management standards of
OBTAIN, SCRATCH, and RENAME.  With CVAF, it became possible to perform VTOC
processing that had been difficult (if not nearly impossible) to accomplish.
The concept of the indexed VTOC was introduced to complement the basic
functionality of CVAF.  New macros were also included with CVAF to allow for
enhanced functions.
THE VTOC
The VTOC on any disk volume consists of 140-byte records known as Data Set
Control Blocks (DSCBs).  There are potentially up to six different DSCB formats
within any one VTOC, although the format 6 DSCB is almost never used (in fact I
have never seen one).  The format 4 DSCB anchors the VTOC and is pointed to by
the UCB for the volume.  It contains information describing the volume itself,
including the volume characteristics such as the number of cylinders, tracks per
cylinder, and track size.  The VTOC size and the number of DSCBs that can fit
onto one track can also be found in the format 4 DSCB.
Three different DSCBs (formats 1, 2, and 3) are used to describe the individual
datasets on a volume.  The format 1 DSCB contains the dataset name, the DCB
characteristics, the number of extents allocated to the dataset, information
describing up to three dataset extents, as well as other relevant dataset
information.  A format 2 DSCB will exist if the dataset is index sequential.  It
is pointed to by the format 1 DSCB.  A format 3 DSCB will exist if the dataset
has more than three extents.  It is pointed to by the format 1 DSCB unless the
dataset also has a format 2 DSCB, in which case it is pointed to by the format 2
DSCB.  For VSAM datasets that have more than 16 extents, a format 3 DSCB can
also be pointed to by another format 3 DSCB.
If a volume has a disabled indexed VTOC, the format 5 DSCB chain will describe
the freespace information for the volume.  If the indexed VTOC is enabled, a
single format 5 DSCB exists containing no freespace information; however, it
provides a base to build a format 5 DSCB chain if the VTOC index should ever
become disabled.
A pseudo-DSCB (the format 0 DSCB) exists for each VTOC DSCB that is currently
unused.  It consists of 140 bytes of binary zeros.
Prior to the existence of indexed VTOCs, access to a format 1 DSCB would proceed
as follows.  From the UCBVTOC pointer, access could be gained to the format 4
DSCB, and once there the remaining DSCBs would be read sequentially until the
desired format 1 DSCB was located.  If the DSCB you were looking for was located
near the end of the VTOC, a long search would be required.  This long sequential
search gave seed to the idea of the indexed VTOC.
THE INDEXED VTOC
The indexed VTOC is a sequential dataset (dataset name prefixed by
‘SYS1.VTOCIX’) that acts as an extension to the standard VTOC.  The indexed VTOC
dataset is composed of four types of 2048-byte VTOC Index Records (VIRs).
Access to the indexed VTOC is gained through the VTOC Initialisation Block
(VIB), which contains a pointer to the indexed VTOC.  Besides pointing to the
format 4 DSCB, the UCB also contains a pointer to the VIB (UCB offset X‘2C’).
Briefly, the four types of VTOC index record and their functions are:
1    The VTOC Index Map (VIXM): this record is used to describe which VIRs are
currently in use.  It also contains VTOC Recording Facility (VRF) data that can
be used to reconstruct portions of the indexed VTOC if processing is interrupted
during a VTOC update.
2    The VTOC Pack Space Map (VPSM): this record is used as a bit map to
indicate which tracks and cylinders are currently allocated.  It takes the place
of the format 5 DSCB chain.
3    The VTOC Map of DSCBs (VMDS): this record is used to indicate which VTOC
DSCBs are in use.
4    The VTOC Index Entry Record (VIER): these records are used to provide
access to format 1 and format 4 DSCBs.
The first three VTOC index records are commonly referred to as the map records
as they provide ‘in use’ information.  Typically, there is only one of each of
these records within an indexed VTOC, although very large volumes such as double
or triple capacity 3380s would have multiple VPSM records and volumes with a
very large VTOC could have multiple VMDS records.
Generally, there is more than one VIER contained in an indexed VTOC and quite
often multiple levels of VIERs exist.  High-level VIERs point to lower-level
VIERs in a tree-like manner until a second-level VIER points to a first-level
VIER.  For example, third-level VIERs point horizontally to other third-level
VIERs and vertically to second level VIERs - second-level VIERs point
horizontally to other second-level VIERs and vertically to first-level VIERs.
This does not imply that there must be higher-level VIERs, only that there may
be if VIER splits have necessitated their introduction.  First-level VIERs
consist of ascending alphabetically sorted index entries that contain pointers
to the DSCBs for the dataset they represent.
The multi-level VIER structure with sorted first-level index entries permits an
almost binary search to locate a format 1 DSCB.  This can be much more efficient
than the sequential search required when using an unindexed VTOC.
Although it is not necessary for an indexed VTOC to be enabled for CVAF to be
used, if it is active it is easy to see how the information contained in the
VIRs can be used by CVAF to provide enhanced functions.
THE CVAF MACROS
Several CVAF macros exist to provide access and update capabilities to the
various components of the VTOC and indexed VTOC.  It is through the following
macros that the enhanced capabilities of VTOC processing are realised:
•    CVAFDIR - this macro can be used with either an indexed VTOC or an
unindexed VTOC to read or write DSCBs, and with an indexed VTOC to read or write
VIRs.  DSCB access can be by dataset name or DSCB address (either CCHHR or TTR).
VIR access is by the RBA of the record desired.
•    CVAFDSM - this macro can be used with an indexed VTOC to read VTOC index
map records (VIXM, VPSM, and VMDS).  It is also used to add or delete index
entries from the first-level VIERs.  Any requested updates to records accessed
by this macro can only take effect when the VIR is rewritten to the indexed VTOC
via CVAFDIR.
•    CVAFFILT - this macro can be used with an indexed VTOC or an unindexed VTOC
to read all DSCBs (format 1, 2, and 3) for one or more fully qualified dataset
names or a single set of partially qualified dataset names.
•    CVAFSEQ - this macro can be used to read, in alphabetical order, the format
1 DSCBs from an indexed VTOC or the dataset names from the VTOC index entries.
It can also be used with an indexed VTOC or an unindexed VTOC to read format 1
DSCBs in physical sequential order.
•    CVAFTST - this macro is used to determine whether a system is eligible to
use an indexed VTOC and whether the volume specified by a UCB has an active
indexed VTOC or not.
•    CVAFVOL - this macro is used to build the VIB for the volume specified by
the UCB.
For details on these macros and their parameters see the manuals System Data
Administration and CVAF Diagnosis Reference.
Except for the CVAFTST macro, which you never have to be authorised to use, and
the CVAFVOL macro, which you always have to be authorised to use, the CVAF
macros can be used in either an authorised or an unauthorised environment.  When
authorised, the VTOC can be accessed directly without first being allocated or
opened.  When unauthorised, the VTOC must be allocated and opened before it can
be accessed.  When CVAFDIR is used to write a DSCB or VIR, it must be done in an
authorised environment.
HOW CVAF MAY BE USED
After reviewing this information it can be seen that one enhancement to VTOC
processing introduced by CVAF is the ability to update VTOC data.  Consider the
following scenario.
Uncatalogued, outdated copies of ISPF datasets (panel, message, CLIST, or
skeleton) exist with identical dataset names as the current catalogued
production copies.  You would like to clean up these outdated datasets, but
because the current user log-on procedure contains allocations to the production
versions of these identically-named datasets and users are logged on
continuously, when you try to delete the old datasets a ‘DATASET IN USE’
condition occurs (MVS enqueues on the dataset name independent of the VOLSER).
Undaunted, you obtain a dump of the VTOC and find the CCHHR of the DSCBs for the
corresponding old datasets.  You disable the indexed VTOC (if it is enabled),
ZAP the format 1 DSCBs with unique dataset names, delete these newly-named
datasets, and enable the indexed VTOC (if it has been disabled).

The above scenario poses a practical situation in which CVAF might be used to
simplify the solution.  In next month’s issue an example of a program will be
published which uses CVAF macros to update a VTOC DSCB and its corresponding
indexed VTOC.  In this example, the dataset name contained in a format 1 DSCB is
changed using information provided via a TSO command processor interface.  The
VOLSER of the volume on which the change is to take place is entered as well as
the existing and new dataset names.  Once the environment has been established
the user is prompted to confirm the update and the DSCB is altered if confirmed.
If the source dataset is catalogued on the entered volume or if a dataset with
the new dataset name already exists on the volume, the update fails.
Using CVAF has simplified this renaming operation and requires far less
technical expertise.  The only information required is the VOLSER, the existing
dataset name, and the new dataset name.  No SUPERZAP dumping, calculation of ZAP
offsets, or indexed VTOC manipulation is required.
As mentioned above, we shall be continuing this article next month when we shall
be looking in detail at a practical implementation of many of the facilities
described.

     © Xephon 1989















































