Converting to DFSORT Release 11

Why would anyone write about installing IBM's DFSORT? "Piece
of cake", I thought before I did it.  Although this article is the
result of a conversion from SYNCSORT to DFSORT, the first
one I have ever heard of going in that direction, most of it can be
applied to the installation of any software, especially if it involves
a conversion.  A conversion can be from one version to the next
of the same product, or to a completely new product guaranteed to
be slightly incompatible, for example in aliases, LPA loading and
concatenation, APF, defaults for installation-wide parameters, the
whole area of extension to de facto standards and, of course,
SMP/E.

The following information is in the form of tips, which are
categorised into areas of interest, to enable you to select what
interests you.

WHAT TO WATCH OUT FOR IN DFSORT 11

Be sure to carefully review the bucket provided by IBM that
identifies known problems with DFSORT Release 11.  The one
you are almost guaranteed to run into is an infinite loop whenever
an empty dataset is being sorted -  UL48278 is required to fix this.
There are also several 0C4 problems listed.

Whenever ordering a new product from IBM, as opposed to a new
version, be sure to order the bucket and fixes on tape at the same
time.  Part of the installation process should be determining what
fixes to put in and putting them in before you go into production.
For each fix considered, contact IBM to determine whether there
are any known problems with the patch - the newer the patch, the
bigger the danger that it will cause more problems than it will fix.

Some of the IBM defaults for DFSORT should be investigated.
DYNAUTO is not the default, meaning that sort work files will
not be automatically allocated if //SORTWKnn DD statements are
not supplied, even though the IBM-supplied SORT and SORTD
procedures lack //SORTWKnn DD statements.  The installation
verification jobs will not detect this problem and you won't find
this out until you run your first sort that is bigger than the
available virtual memory (below and above the line).

Because SIZE defaults to MAX, MAXLIM determines how much
virtual memory DFSORT will use below the line.  The default of
1 megabyte seems to make sense at first glance since that is the
minimum region size specified on job cards these days.  But what
about sorts initiated with the SORT verb in COBOL programs?
Since the COBOL program needs space too, DFSORT will never
get its required 1 megabyte.  Setting MAXLIM to 512K will
normally solve the problem and should not affect performance in
an MVS/XA or MVS/ESA environment.  Because TMAXLIM is
still 4 megabytes, the 512K subtracted from below the line is still
available above the line.

By default, DFSORT will not abend if a critical error occurs.
Instead you will get a return code of 16.  If your production job
streams are not set up to monitor return codes via the COND
statement on the JOB card or the EXEC statement of subsequent
steps, you will have to change this parameter to ERET=ABEND.

Exit return codes, which are by default ICEMAC EXITCK=
STRONG, are enforced much more strictly than they are in
SYNCSORT or releases of DFSORT prior to Release 10.  The
one you are most likely to run into is the use of return code zero
for the E35 exit, which is now flagged ICE071A when there is no
SORTOUT file.  Whether you correct the exits involved
(changing the return code to four) or change the default to
EXITCK=WEAK, which requires an IPL if you choose to install
any part of DFSORT in the LPA, would depend upon how many
exits have to be changed and whether you can find the source for
them.

Finally, a few general words about DFSORT parameters
(ICEMAC).  They should be changed using SMP/E user
modifications.  Jobs SMOPRECE and SMOPAPPE in SAMPLIB
provide sample JCL to receive and apply them.  Look carefully:
most parameters have to be changed twice in two different
modules - one that determines which parameters are in effect for
sorts done directly from JCL, and the other for sorts called from
programs.  The most important point, however, is that if you
install DFSORT as resident, these two modules get put into LPA
and a CLPA IPL is required before parameter changes come into
effect.

TRANSPARENCY TO THE USER

The goal of any software installation is to make it transparent to
the user.  For an applications programmer, the user is the person
who actually uses the application: the on-line terminal operator or
the reader of printed reports.  For a systems programmer, the
terminal operator is considered, but the users most affected are
inevitably the applications programmers who will spend the next
few days correcting programs and JCL to make up for any lack of
transparency - that is fixing the application to create the illusion of
transparency for the end user.

Since the module names are completely different for SYNCSORT
and DFSORT, transparency means figuring out all possible values
that could be coded on an EXEC statement to reference
SYNCSORT and then creating aliases for them in DFSORT.
Yes, procedures in SYS1.PROCLIB or any of its concatenated
procedure libraries should be modified to optimise the operation
of the new sort, but never forget that there is undoubtedly some
production JCL out there that either does not use any of the
procedures, calling the program directly from a // EXEC PGM
reference, or one that has built its own in-line or library
procedures.  Before you agree to any target date for production,
you must know whether the same JCL used for the old program
(SYNCSORT in our case) can be used to run DFSORT.  If not,
every production JCL library and referenced procedure library in
the installation must be searched for references to the old
program, and changed for the new program.

ALIASES

SYNCSORT comes with the aliases of SORT, ICEMAN,
GENERATE and, optionally, IEBGENER defined for the sort and
copy facilities of SYNCSORT.  Unfortunately, DFSORT does not
come with the aliases of SYNCGENR, SYNCSORT, or
GENERATE.

It is easy to define aliases incorrectly.  The TSO RENAME
command's ALIAS parameter can no longer be relied on to create
alias names for load modules properly in a PDS.  In fact, IBM
warns against using RENAME for this purpose in newer versions
of the TSO manuals.  The problem is that it seems to work.  A //
EXEC PGM statement referencing the alias successfully loads the
program for which the alias stands, and executes it flawlessly.
However, it will not load successfully in the LPA!

The right way to do it is with the Linkage Editor's ALIAS
statement.  Since one mistake could destroy the load module for
which the alias is being defined, this is not something you want to
attempt to figure out at 4 am with your IPL window closing fast.
In a pinch, it is safer and faster to use ISPF 3.3 to rename copies
of the module, even if it does needlessly waste LPA space.  You
can always fix it up for the next CLPA IPL.

EXTENSIONS

Extensions to official or de facto standards are often used as
benefits to attract customers away from software that either
adheres to an official standard or creates a de facto standard.
Although the extensions frequently save time, either for the
computer or the programmer (ie performance or productivity),
they also help to lock you into that product, or at least make
conversion to another product more difficult.

The one SYNCSORT extension that can really test your problem
determination skills is the OUTFIL statement.  It is most
frequently used to create multiple output files from a single sort
input file based on a value in the specified columns:

    OUTFIL FILES=1,INCLUDE=(1,3,CH,EQ,C'421')

will put all records with a key of '421' into the file identified by
the DDNAME SORTOF1.  The original OUTFIL statement,
without the SYNCSORT extensions, was used by the original
IBM Sort/Merge package, but is no longer supported by
DFSORT.  To provide some sort of upwards compatibility,
DFSORT ignores the OUTFIL statement, not even checking it by
the original syntax rules of Sort/Merge.  As a result, you get no
error messages on the OUTFIL statement, but you do get a
message complaining about a missing DD statement for
SORTOUT.

DATASET NAMING

IBM normally sets up the installation JCL supplied to work best
with one high-level name for each version of each IBM product
installed.  However, in most installations, creating a high level for
smaller products like DFSORT, with a small number of associated
datasets, is typically viewed as creating needless work for the
security administrator.  On the other hand, there are many good
reasons to keep as few datasets as possible in the Master
Catalogue, making SYS1 an unsuitable candidate for any datasets
required before JES2 is started.

The SYS1 datasets create a problem of their own.  The same
dataset names cannot be used by the software being replaced
because the test installation will replace some or all of the
modules currently used in production.  But, when you do go to
production, the new software must replace the old in some cases.
For example, SYS1.SORTLIB may have been coded in
production JCL.  Typically, the solution is a few renames when
you put the new version into production, but be sure to tell SMP/E
about these new names or future maintenance will fail.

LINKLIB AND LPA MODULES

The best thing you can ever do, especially for non-IBM products,
is to give them their own LINKLIB and LPALIB, assuming that
they have load modules suitable for both.  Cutting over to
production is easy: just change the LNKLSTxx and IEALPAxx
members of SYS1.PARMLIB to remove the old software's
libraries from the concatenation list and add the new.  Testing is
also easy: create temporary LNKLSTxx and IEALPAxx modules
and refer to them with a R 0,CLPA,LNK=xx,LPA=xx at IPL
time.  Separate LINKLIB and LPALIB quickly identify any
module names that could be used on a // EXEC PGM statement
for the old software, and what aliases are needed there for the new
software.

LPALIB and LINKLIB libraries are certainly not the only system
datasets where this holds true, but changes that create secondary
extents can cause inaccessibility to data in those newly-created
extents until the next IPL.  Specifying zero for the secondary
space allocation is probably a good idea.

LPALIB and LINKLIB concatenations have a few other fine
points.  Even though SYS1.LPALIB and SYS1.LINKLIB are not
listed in SYS1.PARMLIB's LNKLSTxx and IEALPAxx members,
they are implicitly first.  That has some important implications.
You cannot override modules in SYS1.LPALIB and
SYS1.LINKLIB with modules in the concatenated libraries.  It
also means that the blocksize of any concatenated library cannot
exceed the blocksize of SYS1.LPALIB or SYS1.LINKLIB.
Finally, just because SYS1.LINKLIB and SYS1.LPALIB are
automatically APF-authorised, does not mean that the same
applies to all concatenated libraries.  Be sure to include them in
IEAAPFxx, along with the DASD volume where they reside.
Obviously, that also means that you should not move anything
APF-authorised without changing IEAAPFxx.

Some products have no need for modules in LINKLIB at all.
Since they are not accessed from user batch jobs, a //STEPLIB
DD statement in the STC procedure is all that is needed to point to
the library of modules.

When it is finally time to IPL to put your new LPA members into
production, one thing is worth considering.  If you see that
anyone (including you) has made any changes to any module in
any library in the LPA concatenation, spend a few minutes doing
an extra CLPA IPL to make sure that those changes are not going
to create a problem.  Otherwise, you may spend the next few
hours trying to find out what is wrong with the new software you
are installing when the real culprit is a previous change that has
not come into effect yet because no one has IPLed with a CLPA
since it was made.  Needless to say, back-ups that can be restored
stand-alone are a pre-requisite of any IPL of this kind.

IEBGENER REPLACEMENT

SYNCSORT and DFSORT each attack the problem of replacing
IEBGENER differently, but both work on the same principle: they
have a sort front-end program that handles the most common
usage, a straight copy, by calling sort with appropriate control
statements; they call IBM's IEBGENER, either before copying
begins if the usage is not 'common', or after copying has been
attempted if the sort fails.  SYNCSORT uses the Linkage Editor
to make a copy of IBM's IEBGENER, inserting its own code in
front.  DFSORT has only its front-end module renamed as
IEBGENER.  You must then tell it where to find the real
IEBGENER, which must be renamed.  Since this is specified as a
DFSORT parameter (ICEMAC), that necessitates an IPL with
CLPA if you have installed DFSORT resident.  You also must tell
SMP/E the new name for IEBGENER, otherwise any IEBGENER
maintenance will fail.

That is how you would completely replace IEBGENER.  If you
are willing to change JCL for large copy jobs, both SYNCSORT
and DFSORT come already prepared to replace IEBGENER's
capability if you code SYNCGENR or ICEGENER as a program
name.

As a closing note, I should mention that you really can save
substantial resources for large files using DFSORT's ICEGENER
instead of IEBGENER, a utility soon to reach its 30th birthday.
The following results were obtained on an idle 32-megabyte IBM
4381 Model 14 under MVS/XA 2.2.0 copying a 48-cylinder
variable blocked dataset with LRECL=32756 and
BLKSIZE=32760:

         IEBGENER DFSORT
    Elapsed time 27 sec 26 sec
    CPU time 17.55 sec 2.39 sec
    SRB time 2.18 sec 0.36 sec
    SIOs 1334 114

However, if you have datasets with smaller block sizes, the results
are quite different.  Copying a 40-cylinder variable blocked
dataset with LRECL=3116 and BLKSIZE=3120:

    IEBGENER DFSORT
    Elapsed time 79 sec 47 sec
    CPU time 17.40 sec  3.21 sec
    SRB time 10.61 sec 0.36 sec
    SIOs  14,125 102

Jon Pearkins
Certified Software Specialists Ltd (Canada) © Jon Pearkins 1989

