Recent IBM announcements
ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
IBM chose 15 February, Presidents’ Day in the USA, to unveil details of its
latest software, which should help IBM large-systems installations plan for
future expansion and reassure them of the value of their investments in IBM 3090
E series hardware.  At the heart of these announcements is  a new machine
architecture, Enterprise Systems Architecture/370 (ESA/370), which is
implemented in MVS/ESA, a combination of MVS/SP Version 3 and MVS/DFP Version 3.
At present, ESA/370 is to be confined to IBM 3090 E series mainframes and the
newly-announced IBM 4381 91E and 92E models.  Contrary to much of the
speculation prior to these announcements, ESA/370 is still based on 31-bit
addressing: increased addressing is provided by new facilities which allow users
to access multiple (up to 8000) address and data spaces, each of up to 2Gb.
Figure 1 shows how MVS has evolved in terms of storage addressability.
HIPERSPACES
Data can also be processed using newly-introduced High Performance Space
(Hiperspace).  Hiperspace is used to transfer data in 4K multiples to and from
address spaces.  There are two varieties of Hiperspace.  One is reserved
exclusively for authorised programs and can only be used on processors with
expanded storage.  The other is for user applications to use via the new data
windowing facilities, which provide a high-level language interface.  This
second type of Hiperspace will use expanded storage if it is available.
MVS/ESA users can expect performance improvements through enhanced library
services, which maintain copies of the most frequently used load modules in data
spaces for faster access and to reduce I/O.  In-storage library directories are
also kept.
DFSMS
The Data Facility Storage Management Subsystem (DFSMS) is the name given by IBM
for the combined functionality of the DF family of products and RACF.  This,
together with the announcement of Version 3 of MVS/DFP, reinforces the
credibility of IBM’s promise to provide its customers with system managed
storage.  Few of the actual details have so far been revealed although the
importance of the role of the storage or data administrator has been strongly
emphasised.  This position will need to be created or, at the very least
upgraded, at most installations.  The Interactive Storage Management Facility
(ISMF) has been considerably extended to become the key component in DFSMS.
Dataset and storage profile definitions will be controlled by the administrator
through ISMF reducing the involvement traditionally assumed by the user.
PR/SM
Further hardware differentiation has been made between the 3090 E series and
IBM’s other mainframes with the introduction of the 3090 Processor
Resource/Systems Manager (PR/SM).  PR/SM (pronounced ‘prism’) enables a 3090 E
processor to be partitioned  into a maximum of four logical partitions or up to
eight  logical partitions for a multi-processing model operating in the
physically partitioned configuration.  PR/SM supersedes the Multiple High
Performance Guests Support (MHPGS) feature.
HOW IT AFFECTS OTHER PARTIES
Assuming that IBM can successfully deliver these products, and do so on time,
who stands to be adversely affected by these announcements?
By bringing expanded storage into the foreground, IBM obviously intends to
emphasise the greater functionality of its newer mainframes and in so doing
effectively kill off sales of its older models, notably the 3080 series.
Similar strategies have worked in the past and should work this time.
The plug compatible manufacturers, notably Amdahl and NAS, have some catching up
to do.  While it is very unlikely that the timing of these announcements will
have caught either by surprise, estimates on just how much work is involved in
implementing the new announcements vary from analyst to analyst.  The PR/SM
announcement must clearly be seen as IBM’s answer to Amdahl’s Multiple Domain
Facility (MDF), which offers similar capabilities.  On the surface, PR/SM could
be potentially very damaging to Amdahl, since some Amdahl mainframe sales can be
attributed to MDF’s success.
There does not appear to be too much in the MVS/DFP Version 3 announcements that
should unduly worry the likes of Sterling Software, Computer Associates, or
Innovative Data Products, suppliers of alternative storage management products,
apart from providing further evidence that IBM is pursuing a market hitherto
left largely for third-party software vendors to exploit.

          © Xephon 1988
































































