IBM announcements

With IBM's introduction of the ES/9000 and ES/3090-9000T
mainframes on September 5 came a wealth of software
announcements that exploit the underlying 390/ESA
architecture.  Not surprisingly, IBM has taken this opportunity
of positioning many more components of MVS-related
software more squarely under the SAA umbrella.  The
announcements also confirm IBM's commitment to distributed
and cooperative processing as well as going some way to
satisfying some long-standing user requests for dynamic
configuration.


MVS/ESA SP 4.1

With MVS/ESA SP 4.1, IBM introduces the Hardware
Configuration Definition (HCD) facility for on-line
configuration definition.  HCD will be enhanced in MVS/ESA
SP 4.2 (see below) to enable new I/O configurations to be
defined dynamically.  HCD includes an aid for migrating
existing MVSCP and IOCP definitions.  It will no longer be
necessary to install the MVS 3.8 base product before building a
new MVS system and gone too is the need for a SYSGEN as it
will now be possible to install MVS/SP 4.1 using standard
SMP/E functions.

A new term introduced is SYStems comPLEX or sysplex,
multiple systems joined together by hardware and software.  A
sysplex can comprise multiple MVS systems running under
PR/SM on a single processor or multiple MVS systems running
on up to eight processors.  Functions within a sysplex are
controlled using the newly-introduced cross-system coupling
facility (XCF) services.

MVS/ESA SP 4.1 will be generally available from October
1990.


MVS/ESA SP 4.2

As well as extensions to HCD, MVS/SP 4.2 will herald the
arrival of APPC/MVS, providing the MVS/ESA user with
support for LU6.2 connectivity.  Furthermore, APPC/MVS
will deliver the DDM protocols necessary for distributed file
management and remote access to the data and storage
management components on MVS/ESA systems.

SRM gets an overhaul resulting in what IBM claims will be a
simplification of systems tuning through a reduced set of less
complex SRM tuning parameters.

MVS/ESA SP 4.2 will be generally available from March
1991.


DFP 3.3.0

DFP 3.3.0 will provide users with a platform for distributing
data allowing access to MVS datasets from a workstation.
Interestingly, it will be through Sun Microsystems Inc's
Network File System (NFS) that this capability will be
delivered.  DFP 3.3.0 will also tighten up VSAM VVDS
integrity and recoverability by allowing datasets to be opened
in cases where a previous extend has failed.  The incomplete
extend operation will be backed out and the associated
mismatches in the VTOC, VVDS, and catalog will be
corrected.

DFP 3.3.0 will be generally available from April 1991.  NFS
server support will be available from July 1991.


TSO/E 2.3

TSO/E 2.3 extends its support of REXX by allowing users to
write APPC/MVS transactions using REXX.  APPC/MVS
support is also extended to the TSO/E TEST command.

In response to user demand, facilities are provided for the
TSO/E LOGON panel and its related help text to be customized
by the user.

TSO/E 2.3 will be generally available from March 1991.


DB2 2.3

While the main thrust of the DB2 2.3 announcement is its
distributed database capabilities, prospective users will have to
wait to learn the date of its scheduled availability.  Of
immediate interest will be the performance boosts brought
about by streamlining several DB2 routines.  Hardware
enhancements incorporated in the ES/9000 190 and above; the
ES/3090-9000Ts; and the ES/3090 models 180J, 200J, 280J,
and above; will improve relational sorting while program re-
design will mean slicker join processing, faster batch
processing, and speedier REORGs and RECOVERs.  BIND
processing is improved by allowing users to bind DB2
applications into smaller, easier to handle packages which can
be used by several applications.

A few limitations have been relaxed: the maximum number of
concurrent users goes from 220 to 2000, the maximum number
of columns rises from 300 to 750, the composition of DB2
index keys is increased to 64 columns from 16, the limit on the
number of currently open DB2 datasets is extended to 10 000,
and the limit for decimal precision is raised from 16 digits to
31.

DB2 2.3 without the distributed data management functions
will be generally available from November 1991.


CICS/ESA 3.2

Principally, CICS/ESA 3.2 extends the capacity of CICS/ESA
3.1 and boosts performance.  Most of the CICS nucleus
modules are shifted above the 16-megabyte line where they are
joined by the major CICS tables, notably the TCT.  This will
free up 400K of storage below the line for the nucleus modules
plus around 600 bytes per terminal.  Additional performance
benefits can be expected through speedier initial MRO
connection times, improved program retrieval, and a reduction
in the amount of monitoring overhead.

As IBM has already indicated, macro-level support is totally
withdrawn in CICS/ESA 3.2.  The EXEC CICS ADDRESS
CSA command is no longer supported - system information
should be accessed through the INQUIRE and SET commands.

The SAA Common Programming Interface for communications
is now offered to CICS users as an alternative to the command-
level interface for LU6.2 services and program-to-program
communication.  In addition, the developers of SAA Common
User Access applications will find improved cursor support on
input mapping.

Other 'goodies' in CICS/ESA 3.2 include a batch interface to
the CSD file, improved LU6.2 security, the ability to remove
dynamically-installed resource definitions from a running CICS
system, enhanced CICS message handling facilities, and the
simplified start-up of resource managers such as DBCTL.

CICS/ESA 3.2 will be generally available from July 1991.


IMS/ESA 3.2

With no firm delivery date - just a promise to let everyone
know by June 1991 when they will be available -
announcements for the IMS/ESA Transaction Manager and the
Database Manager amount to little more than Statements of
Direction.  Both announcements include details of how
IMS/ESA will fit into the SAA world.

IMS/ESA Transaction Manager 3.2

Distributed processing capabilities will be provided by
IMS/ESA Transaction Manager 3.2 in the form of APPC/IMS.
This will enable function to be distributed to departmental
systems running under CICS/VSE or OS/400 using IMS/ESA
as the host.

The long-standing request for a dynamic terminal definition
facility will be realized with the Extended Terminal Option
(ETO), unfortunately a separately priced feature.  With ETO,
terminals will only need to be defined to VTAM.

IMS/ESA Database Manager 3.2

The highlight of the IMS/ESA Database Manager 3.2
announcement is the removal of the need to take IMS databases
off-line to perform image copies.  Concurrent image copying
will be supported for full-function IMS databases and DEDBs
under IMS/ESA TM 3.2 or CICS/ESA.

Other new facilities which will be introduced include: the
provision of IMS-specific CLISTs to assist in IMS formatted
dump investigations, DBRC support for the Batch Backout
utility, and the parallel scheduling of multiple OSAM database
writes to different DASD volumes.

                                                        c Xephon 1990

