A CA-TOP SECRET to RACF conversion project


Outline

In the June 1992 issue of MVS Update, I wrote an article
called Why should you consider switching to RACF? As a
matter of fact, at the time this was published, we had just
completed our conversion project. I would now like to describe
how this conversion took place.


GETTING STARTED

Having decided to do a conversion from CA-TOP SECRET to
RACF our primary task was determining how to do it. We had
too little in-house RACF experience to do the conversion all by
ourselves. On the other hand we would not just pay some
consultants to do the job leaving us with a 'black box', ie we
wanted to take an active part in the conversion.

We knew of two companies in Denmark having experience in
this kind of conversion. One was a small independent
consultancy company, the other was IBM. We invited both
companies to propose how they would carry out the conversion
and, not unimportant, what the costs would be.

Both companies had previous conversion experience and tools
to do the conversion automatically: after some negotiation the
conversion costs were almost equal. IBM appeared to be the
company with the most recent conversion experience and the
best conversion tool and consequently it was chosen.

Our starting point was that we were running TSO, batch, and
DB2 with full external security, and for CICS we relied on
internal CICS security and application built-in security.
Furthermore, we were running our multi-session tool, job
scheduler, and network monitors with external log-on security.

The goal was a quick one-to-one conversion, ie all CA-TOP
SECRET entities, eg profiles, users, departments were
converted to RACF equivalents with no further change.


Initial Planning

The schedules were tight. The initial planning took place
during March and the project had to start on 1 April: the actual
conversion was to take place on 28 May.

As part of the initial planning a pre-investigation was made to
reveal any potential problems. Among the things we looked for
were:

o      User-written security calls in applications.

o      Products with log-on security, eg job scheduling and multi-
      session tools, etc - some of these products have log-on
      exits which might need changing.

o      NJE/RJE job handling - this was particularly important for
      us because we depended heavily on JES2 and CA-TOP
      SECRET exits.

o      DB2 and secondary SQL-id because the default IBM exit is
      modified when using CA-TOP SECRET.

o      Use of exits in general.

o      CA-TOP SECRET authorizations not found in RACF, eg
      NOSUBCHK, NOVOLCHK, and NOLCFCHK, etc.

o      Use of CA-TOP SECRET control options, eg AUTH
      which affects the search sequence of authorizations.

o      Dataset profiles with generic characters not found in RACF.

o      Use of RACF bits in the format-1 DSCB for non-VSAM
      datasets and the catalog for VSAM datasets. If this bit is
      present it will cause RACF to search for a discrete dataset
      profile instead of a generic profile.

o      Audit reports - they definitely need to be changed because
      the report tool is new.

This is not a complete list but it may be used as a guideline.


The Project

A project team was established and the roles of the participants
were defined. The project leadership was ours and IBM would
supply assistance and carry out the automatic conversion. My
role in the project was to establish the environment necessary
from the technical side, ie install RACF and make the
alterations required to make the conversion run as smoothly as
possible. I was also responsible for the installation and
maintenance of CA-TOP SECRET and was thus aware of the
differences between the two products.

Using the output from the pre-investigation, IBM produced the
following project plan and the tasks were distributed among the
project participants.

The project plan comprised four main tasks:

1      MVS/RACF systems programming
      -      Installation of RACF
      -      Installation of a RACF administration tool
      -      A way of handling our NJE/RJE jobs and SYSOUT
      -      Review of HSM, SMS, tape management, job scheduling.

2      Other systems programming
      -      Review of CICS and DB2
      -      Review of NetView and multi-session tool.

3      Security administration and auditing
      -      Reports to the security administration
      -      Reports to EDP auditing
      -      Back-up procedures for the RACF security base
      -      Briefing the organization on the conversion.

4      Acceptance test and production
      -      Initial conversion
      -      Complete system test
      -      Final conversion to RACF in production.

Beyond the scope of the actual conversion project there was a
need for education. The systems programmers responsible for
installation, the security administrators, and the EDP auditors
had to be trained. This was mainly solved by IBM education
both in-house and externally.


The Conversion Environment

Our environment for the conversion was excellent. We were
running a mainframe with three MVS LPARs: one for
production, one for development, and one for systems
programming. The latter was allocated for our exclusive use to
ensure that nothing could interfere with the conversion and to
allow the two other MVS LPARs to run unaffected.

The RACF software was installed on our systems programming
MVS, and as CA-TOP SECRET allows RACF to co-exist we
did not even bother to remove CA-TOP SECRET from the
system. On the contrary, if we wanted to test something with
CA-TOP SECRET instead of RACF, all that was required was
an IPL.

You can actually start CA-TOP SECRET whenever you want,
even when RACF is active; but because some RACF control
blocks are different from CA-TOP SECRET's you will
experience all kinds of abends if you try to start CA-TOP
SECRET when everything else is up and running.


The Conversion Tool

The tool used for the automatic conversion of our security base
is developed by IBM in Denmark and is called RATS. Input to
the tool is a print-out of the entire CA-TOP SECRET security
base together with a listing of all catalogs, a complete member
listing of all APF libraries, all linklist libraries, and all
LPA libraries. The member listings are necessary if you use
program protection. Output from the tool consists of a number
of CLISTs containing the RACF commands to build the
equivalent RACF security base.

RATS itself uses several different IBM products, some of
which we did not have in-house, so the agreement with IBM
was that we let IBM do the automatic conversions off-site.
Since such data reveals your security policies and may even
reveal security exposures, we were naturally a little bit
concerned about sending copies of our security base out of the
house. This required some extra documents stating IBM's
liability regarding the data from our security base.

During the project, three conversions actually took place: the
first was at the beginning of the project to reveal any
discrepancies between CA-TOP SECRET definitions and
RACF definitions. Bear in mind that this is an excellent
opportunity to make clean-ups in your security base and your
catalogs. You will probably find profiles protecting non-
existing datasets, users with unintended access to data, several
profiles protecting the same dataset, etc. In your catalogs you
might find aliases no longer in use. The cleaner your old
security base is, the smoother the conversion will be.


Conclusions

We have now been running with RACF for three months and
we are completely satisfied. We have identified the following
benefits:

o      RACF has been running without any problems at all, ie no
      abends, no unknown security calls from any software.

o      Despite the rumours of problems with the new RACF 1.9
      restructured security base we have not had any problems.

o      Applying maintenance on MVS or DFP now automatically
      applies maintenance on RACF if necessary.

o      The time spent on maintenance is reduced because we can
      now apply service without performing a complete
      replacement of the security software and use SMP/E to
      administer it.

o      Our RACF administration tool has eased security
      administration and reduced the time used for administration.

o      There is no checking of CPU-id or expiration date in RACF.

Steen Spuur Hansen
Systems Programmer (Denmark)                              c Xephon 1993

