CPU hardware changes for ESA

This article discusses the nature of the hardware changes (both
mandatory and optional) that are needed to move from System/370
to ESA/370, and how IBM implements those changes on its
3090E and 3090S models.  This may be of interest to users of
those 3090 models, as there are differences in the two
implementations that could affect acquisition decisions.

As a supplier of compatible computer systems, Amdahl is, of
course, very interested in the architectural interface requirements
of new levels of System/370 as they evolve.  This article reflects
research done by Amdahl architects, designers, and engineers into
publicly-available 3090 manuals, and into the running of
diagnostic programs on our own and other 3090 machines.  We
pass this information along without warranty to readers; we
believe it to be accurate at the time of writing.

SOME DEFINITIONS

The ESA/370 architecture is supported by MVS/ESA and its
associated software products and subsystems.  The ESA/370
announcement in 1988 basically defined three areas of MVS/ESA
support:

¥   Support of multiple address spaces

¥   Support for Hiperspaces

¥   DFSMS (Storage Management Subsystem).

Of these three areas, Hiperspace support does not depend on any
new System/370 architectural features and DFSMS does not
depend on any new CPU architectural features (although it will
support new I/O features associated with the 3990 controller when
they are available).

We are therefore concentrating here on support for multiple
address spaces in MVS/ESA.  This is divided below into nine
functions, some of them optional.  Readers will note that the
3090E and 3090S implementations have different degrees of
functionality, and that neither of them implements the full
architectural capability of 8192-related address spaces.

SPECIFIC FUNCTIONS

The following functions are summarised in Figure 1.  The figure
also shows that the implementations break into two levels:

1   A level for the 3090E models and for those models of the
3090S that are based on CPU 'engines' smaller than the 180S
(including, for instance, the 250S).

2   A different implementation level for those 3090S models that
are based on the 180S CPU 'engine', and which might loosely
be called 'larger' 3090S models.

Any 3090 user in doubt about which type of 3090 he has installed
should consult IBM.

In the following descriptions, assume that each function is
mandatory unless specified otherwise.

Access Registers

ESA/370 defines 16 Access Registers that shadow the current
General Purpose Registers (GPRs) in use.  An Access Register
Translation (see below) is needed when a virtual-to-real address
translation is required for an address where the base GPR is
shadowed by an active Access Register, because the GPR is
actually pointing into a separate address space.

Access Register Translation

The task of translating the contents of Access Registers is called
Access Register Translation (ART).  The result of this operation is
a Segment Table Descriptor, which is passed into the regular
virtual-to-real address translation mechanism.

Access Register Translation Lookaside Buffer (optional)

To save potentially many cycles during Access Register
Translation, ESA/370 can include a lookaside buffer (comparable
to the TLB which is used during virtual-to-real address
translation).  The ART Lookaside Buffer (ALB) contains earlier
Access Register-to-Segment Table Descriptor translations which
are saved for later reuse.  The  size  of  this  buffer  can
obviously  affect  the  performance  of MVS/ESA (generally
speaking, the bigger the better), although engineers must
obviously trade off the value of a large ALB against the costs of
including it in the CPU.

ALB purge technique (optional)

In a logically-partitioned mainframe (eg a PR/SM environment in
the 3090E and 3090S) it is of interest to be aware of how the
hardware's ALB purge mechanism works when a CPU is shared
between several SCP environments - it could be local (by
individual partition) or global (whole ALB purged every time).
On the 3090E and 3090S models, ALB purge always works
globally, ie on an ALB purge all entries are purged, regardless of
which partition issues the purge operation.

Access List Entry Token format

The correct name for the pointer derived from the contents of an
Access Register is the Access List Entry Token (ALET); the
ALET is the value which is fed into Access Register Translation
and it can come in two formats.  The smaller implementation
(known as Format-0) supports a total of 2048-related address
spaces and multiple address space addressability of 4 terabytes;
the larger implementation (Format-1) supports 8192 related
address spaces and 16-terabytes of multiple address space
addressability.  In fact, the implementation chosen is currently
academic, as MVS/ESA supports only 256 related address spaces,
but we can expect this to expand in future releases (and future
CPUs).

Linkage Stacking

Initially an extension of the existing PC instruction, to make the
saving and restoring of environments (including GPRs and Access
Registers) more reliable across PC calls, this function has future
implications for the way that address spaces talk to each other;
one could envisage Linkage Stacking being used to allow an
address space in one CPU to communicate with an address space
in another.

New and changed instructions

Seventeen new and eighteen changed instructions are required to
support Access Register Translation (including the ALB) and
Linkage Stacking.

Optional future instructions:

Two optional instructions have been defined, and appear to be
specifically for the future use of IMS/ESA after it is delivered in
1990.  Although these instructions currently are not present on any
3090E or 3090S model, IBM's announcements imply that there
will be an upgrade some time in the future for the 3090S models
based on the 180S CPU 'engine'.

Private Space Facility (optional)

This facility allows the co-existence of the multiple address space
facility, low-address protection, and common segment.  If the
Private Space Facility (PSF) is not present, MVS/ESA will still
run but there will be no sharing of lookaside buffer entries for
common areas; this may degrade performance by around 2%.  The
diagnostic documentation for the 'larger' 3090S models indicates
that PSF should be present on those machines, but in fact
engineering change SEC223775 is needed to implement it.

CONCLUSION

Currently neither the 3090E nor 3090S offers a complete ESA/370
implementation (for example, there is no format-1 ALET
support); however, both implementations are adequate for the
current low level of multiple address space exploitation by
MVS/ESA and subsystem software.  As the exploitation level
increases over the next few years, the 'larger' 3090S models have
some implementation differences which one would expect will
allow them to take greater advantage of such future exploitation.


John James
Amdahl (UK) Ltd © Amdahl 1989
