Getting started with DFSMS

DFSMS can provide major benefits to both MVS/XA and
MVS/ESA environments, especially when used in conjunction
with DFHSM.  But what about the costs of implementation?  A
portion of an IBM Field Television Network (FTN) broadcast
on 7 December, 1990, addressed just that question by going
through an 'Implementation by Milestone' plan developed from
customer experiences by IBMer Nadine Hart.



Install MVS/DFP Version 3

As well as being the first step towards DFSMS
implementation, there are some non-SMS benefits provided by
DFP Version 3, especially to MVS/ESA installations (eg
PDSE), but that is the topic of the relevant release guide.
Without actually turning DFSMS on, Automatic Class
Selection (ACS) testing can begin.  IBM provides an ACS
starter set that will handle 70 to 80% of the dataset allocations
in a typical installation.  Using this starter set, a storage
administrator can use ISMF to get a feel for what DFSMS
would do if it were activated, and make any modifications to
the starter set that would suit it better to the peculiarities of the
installation.

One piece of misinformation about ACS does need to be
dispelled.  Dataset naming conventions are not essential for an
ACS routine to function.  Besides its name, there are more than
twenty other attributes associated with a dataset that can be
used by an ACS routine to determine how to allocate a dataset:
where to put it, how long to leave it there, how big to make it,
how to format it, etc.

Another piece of related misinformation is also worth
dispelling.  Because DFSMS is said to ignore (override would
be a more correct term) SPACE=, VOL=SER, and esoteric
UNIT= specifications during allocation, it is often incorrectly
assumed that ACS routines cannot use the specified DASD
volume serial number to determine where (when using Storage
Group, the SMS equivalent of DASD pool) the dataset should
be allocated.  In fact, at least initially, many installations will
find that, for many application datasets, the VOL=SER
specification is the best way to determine where the dataset
should be allocated.  Similarly, installations that have already
adopted a volume pooling strategy via the UNIT=
specification, will most likely find it to be the driving force in
the ACS routine, at least initially.


Activate the DFSMS System

Every newly allocated dataset will not suddenly be handled by
DFSMS as soon as it is activated.  But ACS routines can be
coded and test datasets allocated to gain some experience with
the system.

Activating DFSMS provides some additional benefits, beyond
automating the management of storage.  Certain features of
DFP Version 3 are not available until DFSMS is activated.
They allow VSAM datasets to be allocated through JCL,
without the need to use IDCAMS;  automate the conversion
from 3380 to 3390 by providing a mechanism for converting
SPACE= specified in (3380) tracks or cylinders to KB or MB;
and enable standards enforcement, by denying allocations not
meeting installation standards.


ManagING Temporary Data

Temporary datasets are the ideal candidates for doing the first
large scale implementation of DFSMS.  As well as being a
very low risk if things go wrong, significant performance
improvements can be realized immediately through the use of
VIO.

First, a clarification, since there are some installations which
define a temporary dataset as any which has a life that does not
exceed a specified period, say three days.  For the purposes of
this discussion, a temporary dataset is created and deleted in
the same job.

One approach is to use VIO for all temporary datasets except:

o      Sort work files
o      Large datasets (eg datasets greater than 5MB).


ManagING Permanent Data

A common approach is to begin the use of DFSMS for
permanent datasets as the first 3390 is being installed, having it
manage only 3390s, until the last 3380 is removed and all
volumes are managed by DFSMS.  IBM reports figures of 30
to 50% reduction in the DASD install window, using this
approach.

There are likely candidates for the first application to be
migrated to DFSMS.

1      TSO data - because it is typically the most out of control,
      from a storage management perspective.  Generally, this
      data belongs to development and testing staff - the
      majority of TSO users - where the unit and volume serial
      number are left blank in option 3.2 (Dataset Allocation) of
      ISPF/PDF.

2      Databases - DB2 STOGROUPs can be converted to
      DFSMS Storage Groups.  DASD volumes dedicated to
      database datasets can be protected from other users, who
      may inadvertently place data on the volume causing
      database reorganizations to fail.  Archive logs and image
      copies can be better managed and 3990-3 functions can be
      fully utilized to improve database performance.

3      Application data - one or more applications can be selected
      for conversion to DFSMS, with improved DASD
      utilization the immediate benefit.

MVS/ESA installations may also want to convert PDSs to
PDSEs, simultaneously with their movement to system-
managed DASD.  PDSEs provide major performance benefits,
not the least of which is the elimination of the need for frequent
compressions on frequently-updated PDSs.  A PDS having a
large number of small members will, however, require
significantly less space (when fully compressed) than it will as
a PDSE.  Each member of a PDSE must begin at the beginning
of a block: this is not the case with a PDS.


Tape Mount Management

Everything said up to this point has not required the use of
DFHSM or any competitive product.  For DFSMS installations
with DFHSM, the pattern of tape mounts can be modified
significantly (for the better), but without the need to change the
JCL of jobs that use tape.

First, the number of tape mounts can be drastically reduced by
filling a reel or cartridge to its full capacity.  DFHSM does this
in two ways: by writing datasets until the tape volume is full
and by using large block sizes to maximize the amount of data
that will fit on a tape volume.  With the new 3490-A10, 1.2GB
can be recorded on a single cartridge.  That is 30,000 tracks on
a 3380 at typical block sizes.

Second, because DFHSM is requesting almost all of the tape
mounts, the vast majority of tape mounts can be concentrated
in one or more daily windows, which could significantly
reduce operations staffing requirements.  Data destined for tape
that cannot wait until the daily window can be temporarily
stored on DASD.

Third, small active tape datasets can be migrated to DASD,
without changing JCL.  Generation Datasets (GDSs) can have
two generations left on DASD and the rest migrated to tape.
Non-GDSs can be migrated using the same standards used for
DASD:  so many days for level 1 (compressed DASD) and so
many days for level 2 (on tape but still catalogued).

Here is how it might be set up:

o      Data Class assigns space.
o      Storage Class directs it to system-managed DASD.
o      Management Class directs it to tape via DFHSM.
      -      Migrates it to tape (DFHSM level 2) at the first space
            management cycle.
      -      Does not back it up.
o      Storage Group must support a 24-hour buffer.

Migrating tape datasets to DASD does have some problems
associated with it:

o      Volume count - some programmers have set it to 99 after
      discovering that the default is 5.  The maximum for DASD
      is 59 or the number of DASD volumes in a storage group,
      whichever is less.

o      UNIT=AFF requires a PTF.

o      Over-allocation of space on DASD.

o      The optimal block size (32,000 to 32,760 bytes) for tape is
      inappropriate for 3380 and 3390 DASD.


Assistance

IBM does offer a no charge program to analyse the potential
benefits of using DFSMS to reduce tape mounts.  SMSVMA,
the SMS Volume Mount Analyzer Program, reads SMF data
and provides several reports detailing its findings.  At least a
week's and preferably a month's worth of data would be
appropriate for a valid analysis.  SMSVMA is available from
your IBM SE, who can obtain it on-line through MKTOOLS
(Marketing Tools).

To assist in the complete conversion process, IBM has several
DFSMS Custom Migration Support offerings available in a
number of countries.  They can be delivered over a period of
up to twelve months, including three on-site visits, and can
help significantly in both the planning and technical areas.

As well as the standard IBM reference manuals that accompany
DFP, there is at least one red manual (from the International
Technical Support Centres) you should be aware of.  Replacing
the obsolete System-Managed Storage Migration Planning
Guide (GG24-1606) is Converting to DFSMS (GG24-3357).  It
covers, in greater detail, much of the material in the FTN and
this article.

If you cannot find a copy of this manual in your installation,
ask your IBM SE to add GBOF-0430 to your installation's
SLSS.  You will then automatically receive all red manuals
classified by IBM as 'Storage and I/O'.

Jon E Pearkins
Certified Software Specialists Ltd (Canada)                  c Xephon 1991

