Positioning for SMS

In the August 1992 issue, we discussed some of the benefits of
System Managed Storage (SMS). This article discusses how to
position for SMS. Whenever possible, it offers a solution that
will help installations to achieve an SMS-compliant storage
environment.

An installation wishing to implement SMS must have
MVS/ESA (or MVS/XA with the correct level of DFP and
appropriate PTFs). Also, a dataset 'policy manager' such as
DFHSM, or an equivalent product, is required to back-up
datasets and migrate them in a hierarchical fashion. RACF or
some other security product would be nice to have, but is not
required.

SMS will not support several of the older storage management
practices. Positioning, therefore, simply means taking care of
unsupported items, and introducing newer, more modern
practices.

Positioning for SMS can take a long time. This is because, in
many cases, end-users are affected. They may need to change
their JCL in order to comply with SMS requirements. Also,
production JCL may have to be changed.

Positioning can be carried out any time before the actual SMS
implementation. However, all positioning items mentioned
below make good sense anyway. Therefore, even if you do not
wish to implement SMS immediately, you would do well to
position for it as early as possible.


Uncatalogued datasets

These are not supported if they reside on SMS-managed
volumes. However, those volumes that are not to be SMS-
managed (for example, system volumes) can continue to have
uncatalogued datasets.

Uncatalogued datasets should either be catalogued or deleted.
In most cases, uncatalogued datasets are the result of bad JCL
practices and, after a clean up, are likely to re-appear.
Therefore, it is important to educate end users on the proper
use of JCL and to point out the implications of creating
uncatalogued datasets.

The storage administrator should put in place procedures to
remove uncatalogued datasets periodically from volumes
targeted to be SMS-managed. One way to do this is to use the
IBM utility DFDSS. A DFDSS job can be set up and run, say
weekly, to round up uncatalogued datasets and delete them.


STEPCAT/JOBCAT JCL statements

SMS does not allow the use of STEPCAT or JOBCAT JCL
statements. Again, this only applies to SMS-managed datasets.
System programmers may need to use STEPCAT or JOBCAT
once in a while, even in an SMS environment. This is fine, as
long as the datasets that are being accessed using STEPCAT or
JOBCAT are not to be managed by SMS.

The storage administrator will find it difficult to ensure that
there are no users of STEPCAT or JOBCAT statements, since
every person, group, or system can potentially have their own
JCL libraries containing these offending statements.

The best way to address this issue therefore is to inform end
users not to use these statements. If this is a serious matter at
your installation, you can prevent their use by coding (or
modifying) one of the JES exits to disallow the use of
STEPCAT and  JOBCAT statements.


Unmovable datasets

Unmovable datasets are those having a DSORG attribute of
DAU, POU, or PSU, or those that were allocated using
absolute track allocation. Unmovable datasets cannot reside on
volumes that are to be SMS-managed.

If there are any POU or PSU datasets, you will often find that
it is not a requirement of any application. Rather, they are there
simply because the person allocating them chose to make them
unmovable. Maybe he or she did not trust HSM (or the storage
administrator!) not to move them.

By far the greatest number of unmovable datasets in an
installation would be those having DSORG=DAU. And, most
likely, they would be used by SAS. At one time, SAS required
them to be unmovable. But, with SAS Release 5.18 (and
above), it is no longer a requirement. Therefore, if you have
SAS 5.18 or above, these datasets can, and should, be
converted from DAU to DA. The way to do this is to use SAS
PROC COPY.

Interactive Storage Management Facility (ISMF) can be
employed to find all unmovable datasets at your installation.
(ISMF is an on-line ISPF application supplied by IBM as part
of DFP.)  End users also need to be informed of this, otherwise
unmovable datasets will re-appear.


Uncatalogued model (or pattern) DSCBs

These are not supported for GDGs. However, catalogued
model DSCBs are still supported. Uncatalogued model DSCBs,
having the same name as the GDG base, were allowed and
tolerated by MVS if they resided on the same volume as the
catalog containing the GDG base. SMS does not allow this.

You will need to find out all uncatalogued model DSCBs, if
any, at your installation.

The following procedure is one way to do this.

1      Use DFDSS to list all uncatalogued datasets.

2      Use the IDCAMS LISTCAT command (on all catalogs) to
      find all GDG bases.

3      Compare the two listings to determine if any uncatalogued
      dataset is also a GDG base. If uncatalogued model DSCBs
      are found, then, for each one, the users of that GDG will
      need to change the name of the model DSCB, catalogue it,
      and insert the new model name in the JCL creating new
      GDG entries.


The IBM utilities IEHMOVE and IEHPROGM

IEHMOVE is not supported for datasets residing on SMS-
managed volumes, and some of the functions of IEHPROGM
are either not supported or behave differently under SMS. End
users need to be informed of this. DFDSS can be used instead
of IEHMOVE to perform equivalent functions. Similarly,
IDCAMS can be used to perform functions similar to
IEHPROGM.


Password-protected datasets

These are not supported for SMS-managed datasets. SMS
ignores passwords, without giving any warning message! So,
under SMS, users will be getting a false sense of security.
Instead of passwords, the security software in use at your
installation (eg RACF, CA-ACF2, or CA-TOP SECRET)
should be used to protect the datasets.

To find out all non-VSAM datasets using passwords, browse
the system dataset called PASSWORD. It contains a list of all
non-VSAM datasets that have passwords. To find out all
VSAM datasets that are password-protected, you can issue the
IDCAMS LISTCAT command on all catalogs and search for
the keyword 'PSWD (SUPP)'.


ISAM datasets

ISAM datasets are not supported on SMS-managed volumes.
Very few installations still have ISAM datasets. If yours does,
they should be converted to VSAM. Quite often, they may not
even be used any more, in which case they can be deleted.
ISMF can be used to scan for ISAM datasets in an installation.


CVOLS and non-ICF catalogs

CVOLs and non-ICF catalogs are not supported for SMS-
managed volumes. Again, most installations do not have these
any more, but if yours does, then this may be good time to
convert to ICF catalogs.


Non-IBM programs

SMS does not allow specific volume references for new dataset
allocations. Any non-IBM program (home-grown or acquired
from a vendor) will not work if it attempts to allocate datasets
to specific volumes within the SMS pool of volumes. There
may be special 'VTOC list' programs at your installation that
will fall into this category.

To determine if your installation is affected, scan all JCL
(especially production JCL) and see if the VOL=SER
parameter is specified for new dataset allocations.


VSAM data spaces

Does you installation still have VSAM data spaces? These are
not supported, and it is time to convert them to normal VSAM
datasets.

Dinesh Dattani
Independent Consultant (Canada)                              c Dinesh Dattani 1992

