IBM announcements

Recent software announcements by IBM, while underlining the strategic importance
of both DB2 and the Data Facility range of products, failed to generate much
excitement amongst industry observers.  Release 3 of DB2 was seen to contain
very little in terms of improved function and performance although the increase
in the maximum buffer pool size, the support for single-byte precision floating-
point data types, and the product's closer adherence to the ANSI SQL standard
were all applauded.

Much greater interest was shown in two new DB2 'extras':  the Data Base
Relational Application Directory (DBRAD) and the DB2/VSAM Transparency program.
DBRAD was welcomed for addressing the needs of users for a data dictionary but
fell well short of what most people had hoped for.  Overall opinion was that
this release of DBRAD was little more than a short-term solution offering a bare
minimum of the facilities that are actually required by DB2 users.  The DB2/VSAM
Transparency program was, however, given an overwhelming vote of confidence.
Its introduction was generally acknowledged as being well timed and tactically
very astute.  It was seen as providing a gentle push to any prospective users
dithering on the threshold of DB2.

The Data Facility announcements fall in line with IBM's stated intention to
provide a range of system (as opposed to user) managed software products.  Data
Facility Product (DFP) version 2 release 3, available in the third quarter of
1987, provides better productivity via the Interactive Storage Management
Facility (ISMF), plus simplified MVS/XA system generation.  IBM claim that
version 2 release 3 of Data Facility Data Set Services (DFDSS), scheduled for
July 31 availability, can out-perform release 2 by 40% when copying sequential
or partitioned datasets.  DFDSS now supports linear datasets, which were
announced in December 1986.  Data Facility Hierarchical Storage Manager (DFHSM)
version 2 release 3, available in the fourth quarter of 1987, can now be set up
to invoke DFDSS automatically to perform volume dumps and incremental back-ups.


































