A study of storage management


INTRODUCTION

Total storage management is the administration of storage hardware, software,
and human resources in a manner that provides the computer storage user with
optimum data storage availability, integrity, and performance at the lowest
possible cost.  The storage management techniques being utilised in most data
processing centres are labour intensive.  The Data Administrator spends much of
his time performing manual functions that the data management software fails to
perform.  The costs and time spent on storage management will increase at
tremendously fast rates if the present day auxiliary storage growth continues
and the storage management techniques remain the same.

Storage management revolves around three major areas:  auxiliary storage
hardware,  the software involved in utilising these devices,  and the human
resources required to manage these two areas.  The storage management software
we use provides adequate control of our external data but is lacking in the area
of technical support, and has a high manual labour requirement.

In the last few years, the demand for external storage in data processing
installations has been phenomenal;  DASD capacity, in many instances, has
increased at 40 to 70% annually.  Last year we increased our total DASD capacity
from 45.9 gigabytes to 70.6 gigabytes, a 54% increase.  The number of software
and hardware products available to satisfy the demand for external storage is
also increasing.  In addition, the use of the data stored in external storage
devices has shifted from batch-oriented jobs to interactive and database
systems.  These systems generally require all data to be on-line and readily
available.  These rapid changes in the storage environment have made the task of
storage management very complicated.

In the past, the amount and type of storage hardware a data processing
installation had installed was generally governed by the processing power of the
mainframe system;  CPU speed and the available memory were the major bottlenecks
for system performance.  Current CPU technology is now out-performing auxiliary
storage hardware and it appears that the hardware will not catch up with CPU
performance over the next decade;  it will, at best, only keep pace with it.  As
the speed of the CPU increases, the time a program spends performing I/O versus
the time spent actually processing becomes proportionately greater.  This has
migrated the performance bottlenecks from the CPU to the auxiliary storage
hardware.  The storage hardware must be able to provide data quickly in order to
prevent the CPU, and indirectly the end user, from being delayed.  The data
access time of a device has become very important.  Installations now require a
large number of storage devices and 24-hour access;  as a result, reliability,
environmental requirements, and availability have also become important factors
in the selection of auxiliary storage hardware.

System storage tuning is generally accomplished by monitoring and tailoring
software products that produce detailed statistics reports and manipulate data
to conform to a set of data management standards.  However, these products can
only take action on the data and functions that the storage administrator
controls.  Since the administrator does not control all functions of storage
management there are times when system tuning is done in a reactive mode,
initiated only after a user begins experiencing problems.  Planning for growth
is done based on the type of external storage hardware presently installed.
Very little auxiliary storage planning is directed towards the use of new
storage technologies.  If the present trends for auxiliary storage growth
continue, and nothing is done about the data management methods, the costs and
time spent on storage management will increase at incredible rates.


PRESENT SITUATION

Over the last few years, improvements have been made to auxiliary storage
hardware.  Most of the hardware has seen significant improvements in
reliability, capacity, performance, and price.  We currently use IBM's latest
DASD (3380 models D and E) and DASD control units (3880s) but there are several
other auxiliary storage devices available that we are not utilising:  cache
control units, solid state DASD, cartridge tape drives, and optical storage
units.  In the past, these other devices have not been utilised for various
reasons:  their price was prohibitive, we had no real business need for them, or
their technology was too new to be considered a stable product.  However, as the
CPU performance continues to increase, these additional storage devices may be a
viable solution to I/O bottlenecks that current disk and tape drives cannot
alleviate.

The storage management software in use at our installation (PACMASTER,
FDR/COMPAKTOR, DFP, RACF, TLMSII) has provided sufficient control over our
external data and storage hardware.  Several of the products are weak in certain
areas and, as the amount of data to manage increases, each of these shortcomings
is magnified.  Some products require a great deal of time or manual effort in
order to accomplish relatively simple tasks and others have been unable to keep
up with new technologies due to poor technical support.

Storage management at our installation is shared by several different
organisations.  The majority of the functions are handled by the Data Storage
Co-ordinator.  However, Systems Software, Capacity Planning, Database
Administration, and Operations Technical Support are also involved in storage
management.  This division of responsibilities causes duplication of effort;
inconsistent practices and procedures; and less than full utilisation of
capacity.  The amount of manual effort involved in storage management leaves no
staff available to review and analyse storage technology opportunities
consistently.


STORAGE MANAGEMENT STUDY RECOMMENDATIONS

To continue to maintain the current level of data availability, and enhance
system performance, each facet of storage management must be automated and
improved.  New concepts and techniques can be adopted that will utilise the
currently available storage hardware and software to reduce present day storage
management problems, and provide a stable base for future improvements in
storage management products.  A total storage management study, which
encompasses all areas of storage management, is recommended.  Specific items to
be addressed should include:

¥    Analyse IBM's strategic plan for total storage management and determine how
this plan impacts your installation.

¥    Analyse your present data management hardware and software and determine if
they can be utilised for automating data storage management functions.

¥    Analyse the hardware and software products IBM has identified as strategic
base products for future development in the area of total storage management and
assess whether you could benefit from the products not currently being used, eg
cache controllers, 3480 tape drives, DFHSM, etc.

¥    Examine third-party vendor auxiliary storage hardware and software to
determine if they are a viable alternative to IBM equivalents.

¥    Examine your storage management organisation and if applicable make
recommendations for improvement.


IBM DIRECTIONS

IBM recently announced their strategy for total storage management.  They have
identified key hardware and software products that will be involved in the
development of total storage management.  These products will be evolved to
become a total resource manager for storage I/O and develop device independence

by separating the logical and physical data.  IBM is attempting to integrate all
hardware and all software to form a balanced system.

Physical space and environmental requirements are becoming major factors in an
installation's total storage capacity.  As a result, IBM is striving to increase
the capacity and capability of their storage hardware without increasing the
physical size or environmental requirements.  IBM has established a base set of
hardware products to be used for all future improvements:

¥    3380 disk drives models D and E - IBM's conventional hard disk direct
access devices.  The model E disk drive has double the capacity of the model D
within the same physical size box.

¥    3880 cache controllers - these controllers load data into their buffers
from the disk drives attached to them.  These buffers act as a staging tank for
data the processor may need for the next transaction.  Holding the data in cache
eliminates the time it takes to search for the data on disk.  These controllers
can improve system performance for heavily used data.

¥    3480 tape cartridge drives - devices for off-line storage.  The tape
cartridge is a quarter of the size of conventional reel tapes yet holds 20% more
data.  These drives are also capable of transferring data at a much faster rate,
using 60% of the power, 60% of the space, and needing less operator involvement
than a standard tape drive.

Third-party vendors are marketing several devices that IBM has chosen to market
in a different manner or not market at all.  These devices are designed to solve
specialised data management problems.  There are two of these devices:

¥    Solid state DASD - solid state devices store data in semi-conductor memory,
eliminating the mechanical delays associated with conventional disk drives.
They are used for applications requiring very high speed data access.  IBM does
not sell an externally attached solid state device; instead, they have renamed
it Expanded Storage and market it as a feature of their 3090 series of mainframe
processors.

¥    Optical storage devices - a new off-line storage technology that stores
data on disk optically rather than magnetically.  At the present time, optical
storage disks are not erasable;  they can be written on only once but can be
read many times.  This limits the use of optical storage devices to applications
which use data that remains primarily static, such as record retention, and data
archival.  Their advantage over conventional off-line storage lies in the fact
that they can store large amounts of data in a relatively small amount of space
and at a higher degree of integrity.
In addition to the hardware, IBM has identified the key software products that
will be involved in the development of total storage management.  These products
used in conjunction with the hardware will allow for system managed storage and
the eventual use of device-independent data.  There are seven key software
products:

¥    MVS/XA
¥    Data Facility Product (DFP)
¥    Data Facility Hierarchical Storage Manager (DFHSM)
¥    Data Facility Data Set Services (DFDSS)
¥    Data Facility Sort (DFSORT)
¥    TSO/E and ISPF
¥    Resource Access Control Facility (RACF).

Most third-party vendors offer storage management software that is equivalent
to, and sometimes better than, IBM software.  The ideal software package should
act as a total resource manager for all external data and auxiliary storage
hardware, automatically adjusting to changes in the data usage and hardware
environment.  Unfortunately, the ultimate storage management package has not yet
been written, but there are products available that can reduce labour intensity
and adapt quickly to changes in technology.  A software evaluation, with

specific goals in mind, will determine which product or products will best meet
your requirements for total storage management.


AUXILIARY STORAGE SOFTWARE

We have installed storage management software from a variety of vendors and
currently have four non-IBM software packages in use:

1    PACMASTER - this product provides an incremental back-up system, the
enforcement of on-line data standards, and data migration.  It is an extremely
flexible DASD management package capable of handling most types of data.  It has
two major drawbacks:  it is very labour intensive, and it continually falls
behind with its technical support of existing problems and new technologies.

2    FDR, FDR/DSF, and COMPAKTOR - this combination of products provides dump
and restore functions plus DASD space management.  They are very fast and
reliable.  According to reports from Datapro Research, FDR has the largest user
base of all non-IBM dump restore products.

3    TLMSII - this is a tape management system.  Our current utilisation of this
product makes it very labour intensive.  Tape management is one area of storage
management in which IBM has not yet offered any type of product.  There is talk
of IBM offering a tape management system in 1988.

4    SYNCSORT - a very efficient and reliable sort program with excellent
technical support.  SYNCSORT holds a top position as a sort package.  According
to Datapro Research, SYNCSORT's user base exceeds all other sort packages
including IBM's.


HUMAN RESOURCES INVOLVED IN STORAGE MANAGEMENT

Estimates indicate that for most data processing installations there is
approximately one person involved in storage management for every 10 gigabytes
of data installed.  Looking at our installation, this statement might appear to
be untrue:  MIS has 70.6 gigabytes and only one person in data management.
While it is true that we have only one person titled for the job of data
management,  a closer look reveals other areas performing data management
functions as well.  These areas include:

¥    Systems Software - managing dataset placement and allocation on 30 DASD
addresses utilises approximately 5% of Systems Software's resources.

¥    Database Administration and Development Support Centre -managing the
allocation, placement, and recovery of datasets on 26 DASD volumes utilises 15
to 20% of both areas' resources.

¥    Performance and Capacity Planning - monitoring DASD volume and dataset
usage utilises approximately 5 to 10% of Performance and Capacity Planning's
resources.
Even with all these resources involved, there are some functions that are still
handled by end users.  They must define the size and location of their data in
terms of a physical device (tracks and cylinders, volume serial number, DASD, or
tape) and deal with the possibility of out of space abends as a result of device
specific requests for space.  Migration of data to different devices, or
different volumes, becomes a major task due to the explicit specification of
volume serial number and device type.  This makes the storage administrator's
job more complicated and often adversely affects the user by requiring numerous
JCL or application changes to match the new device characteristics.


MIGRATING TO SYSTEM-MANAGED STORAGE

IBM is committed to evolving their hardware and software so that it will be
capable of taking over most data management functions.  However, installing all
of IBM's key products, or third-party vendor equivalents, will not immediately
establish system managed storage; steps must be taken to prepare for it.  IBM
has provided some recommendations we can implement to ease the move from manual
to system managed storage.  Below is a list of the major concepts and techniques
that can be used to position an installation for automated data storage
management.

1    Consolidate all of the storage management functions, now handled by various
individuals, and make them the responsibility of the Data Storage Administrator.
His primary responsibility would be to match the users' requirements to the
storage capacities of the installation.  Other areas of responsibility should
include the development of standards and procedures, the implementation and
enforcement of the defined standards, and the management and technical support
of the following areas:  DASD space, performance, data availability, device
support, and security.

2    Establish service levels for storage systems based on a combination of the
user's requirements and the ability of the system to deliver these requirements.
Maintenance characteristics such as back-up frequency, on-line retention,
archival or deletion should be included in the service levels.
3    Establish volume groups according to the dataset type, function, and the
service levels.  This allows the user to view external storage as a single
resource.  Volume pooling reduces the number of out of space abends by allowing
the system to manage dataset allocation and placement.  It will also balance
device utilisation since the device selection algorithm chooses the least busy
device.  Volume grouping removes the user's volume awareness and dependence on
device geometry.  Storage can be referred to by esoteric names, which simplifies
the JCL requirements for the user and reduces the complexity of device
migrations for the Storage Administrator.

4    Eliminate or reduce private user-owned volumes.  Establish data management
as the focal point for all storage management components to include:  storage
software tailoring, catalog maintenance, DASD maintenance, back-up and recovery,
DASD performance, and DASD planning.  This will allow for efficient
administrator control of system managed functions.

Some of the above concepts may already be in place;  the others may not be
applicable or feasible for your installation.  There is no single, simple answer
that solves every installation's problems.  The important point is to do
something now in order to prevent storage management from becoming an
overwhelming and expensive task.  A storage management study should provide
sufficient information for the development and implementation of a total storage
management methodology.  This methodology will reduce your present level of
labour intensity, prepare you for easy transitions to future storage management
technologies, and ensure economical availability of data storage for future
needs.



Robert Davis
Principal Technologist
Ryder Truck Rental (USA) © Ryder Truck Rental 1987














