MVS authorisation

In MVS there are really only two occasions when IBM security rears its head.
The first is the transition between problem state and supervisor state, ensuring
that an application cannot perform restricted interfacing to the operating
system.  The second is at data access and OPEN/CLOSE time, ensuring that an
application gets authorisation to access data.

The key to that authorisation is the MODESET, a type-6 SVC, which permits an
'authorised program' to transform itself into supervisor state: key-0.  The
means of testing for authorisation is TESTAUTH: a service for branching into one
of the supervisor services.  It determines if an SVC was or was not authorised.
TESTAUTH, another type-6 SVC, is normally invoked by an SVC trying to determine
whether its caller is authorised and/or whether he may use the options he has
passed in the parameter list.  It tests for any or all of the following three
states:

¥    Is the authorisation bit (JSCBAUTH) on in the Job Step Control Block
(JSCB)?

¥    Is the caller in supervisor state?

¥    Is the caller in key-0 at the time of the request?

The three conditions are by no means equivalent.  Being in supervisor state may
not be the same as having JSCBAUTH on for some supervisor services.

Some SVCs are totally restrictive.  You must be in supervisor state to issue
them.  For example, you may not issue an SDUMP unless you're APF-authorised.
Other SVCs may be issued by anyone; however, certain of their options may be
APF-restricted.  For example, a GETMAIN is available to anyone; but if the
storage subpool specified is greater than 127, you had better be authorised.

A load module library is an APF-authorised library by virtue of one of the
following conditions:

¥    It is in the LINKLIST concatenation
¥    It is a load module in the Pageable Link Pack Area (PLPA)
¥    It is a dataset specifically identified by both name and VOLSER in IEAAPFxx
of SYS1.PARMLIB.

It is important to remember that it is a job step and not a task that is
authorised - turning the JSCBAUTH bit on is done by initiator logic.  In a batch
job, two things cause this bit to be turned on: firstly, the 'PGM=module-name'
must be found in an APF library in LINKLIST, LPALIB, or in a STEPLIB or JOBLIB
concatenation which is authorised; secondly, the load module must have been
link-edited with the AC=1 option.

However, AC=1 is not, in any way restrictive.  All the COBOL programs that exist
can be link-edited with AC=1; the programs will not be authorised.  AC=1 only
takes effect when the load module library is also APF-authorised.

In coding an authorisation program, a little paranoia goes a long way in
ensuring against a disaster.  Never trust a user parameter. Test its value, to
whom it belongs, its key and the user's key as well.  Test it all by using
MODESET with the EXTKEY option.  This will put your SVC in the same key as the
caller (at the time he called).  Be even more careful with dynamically changing
parameters such as a homegrown authorised subtask in CICS.  While your SVC is
running as one task and looking at its parameter list, a second task in the CICS
address space is changing that parameter list because it is sitting in the DSA
(Dynamic Storage Area) - where anyone might be able to get to it.  Copy that
parameter list to protected storage; such as OSCOR, and manipulate it there.



Brett Jason Sinclair
CICS/VTAM Consultant (USA)    © Brett Jason Sinclair 1987

































































