Exploiting the TSO/E command platform

The TSO/E command platform is a feature of Version 2.2 and
above which is not well publicized but can save your
installation valuable CPU resources. Traditionally, TSO
commands have been executed under their own MVS subtask,
this subtask being created and removed for each and every
command with ATTACH and DETACH macros by IKJEFT01,
the TSO Terminal Monitor Program (TMP).

This incurs some overhead and IBM have now built in a
persistent or permanent command subtask called the TSO/E
command platform. Because some badly behaved TSO
commands may rely upon MVS subtask termination to free up
resources such as storage, not all commands can run on this
platform and accordingly IBM have made it optional.

A list of eligible commands has to be provided by the
installation and specified in the SYS1.PARMLIB member
IKJTSO00 using the keyword PLATCMD. There is a sample
list in SYS1.SAMPLIB and heavily used commands such as
ALLOCATE, FREE, EXEC, and CALL are all acceptable
candidates. These commands are then executed using the
platform subtask by the TMP.

Installation-written commands can be added to the list and it
can then be activated with an IPL or just by using the
PARMLIB UPDATE command. It can be removed just as
easily. Comparing the results with the platform in use and not
in use, a reduction of around 25% CPU time can be observed
for the ALLOCATE command, for example.

What's the catch? None, as far as I can see, but there have
been a few APARs issued and it's worth checking Dial-IBM
using the keyword 'PLATCMD' to ensure that the PTFs are
applied. Some problems with the TSO command TRANSMIT
have been recorded so this should not be run on the platform
until IBM make it better behaved.

Those with TSO/E 2.3 should note that a program platform is
also available and specifiable with the PLATPGM keyword in
IKJTSO00. For further reading on this subject please refer to
the TSO/E Customization manual.

                                                      c Xephon 1993

