Development of an MVS subsystem

Only a few programmers will ever get the opportunity to
program an MVS subsystem or participate in the development
of such a product.  A short time ago I was lucky enough to
become the chief programmer of a subsystem, which was
developed as a component of a big application system.  I would
like to pass on some of my experiences resulting from this
work.

The following IBM manuals have been the basis of my work:

o      GC28-1831 MVS/ESA SPL: System Modifications
      (Chapters 11 to 15).

o      LY28-1496 MVS/ESA Component Diagnosis and Logic:
      Master Subsystem/Subsystem Interface.

o      GG66-3131 The Subsystem Interface in MVS/SP Version 3.

o      SR21-1469 A Guide to Using MVS/XA Interface Facilities
      (Chapter 9) - unfortunately it contains some errors!

The article in MVS Update issues 24 and 25 (September and
October 1988) explaining the MVS subsystem has been very
useful too.

I don't want simply to repeat the contents of these publications
but to present some experiences going beyond what's written
there.


A SUBSYSTEM-SPECIFIC CONTROL BLOCK

A control block specific to the subsystem can either be pointed
to by one of the two SSCVT user fields, or can be linked to the
SSVT.  When terminating the subsystem it's not necessary to
release this area and disconnect it from the SSCVT.  Therefore,
data in such a control block is accessible even if the subsystem
has been terminated.


LEVELS OF ACTIVATION/DEACTIVATION

If the subsystem is to be terminated, either deactivate the entire
subsystem (clear address of SSVT in SSCVT), or make the
functions inactive (set function code vector to zero).  If you do
the latter, the creation of a new SSVT is necessary only when it
is first started after an IPL.  If a subsystem-owned control
block is linked to the SSVT and it is to be accessible when the
subsystem is terminated, only make the functions inactive.


SUBSYSTEM FUNCTIONS

There are four possibilities where and how subsystem functions
are executed (presented below in ascending order of
complexity).

As a 'dummy function' (see Figure 1)

Fields in a subsystem-specific control block (connected to
SSCVT or SSVT) are read or even written.  To do this, it is not
necessary for a function to be active or a function routine to
exist.  This can be used as a simple means of communication
from one address space to another.  When writing, APF
authorization is necessary because this control block has to be
placed in the CSA.

In the function routine (see Figure 2)

Functions, which can be executed immediately, may be
executed solely in function routines.

In the subsystem address space (see Figure 3)

If the real work is done in the subsystem address space, then
it's necessary to have some type of communication from the
function routine, executing in the caller's address space, to the
subsystem address space.  This communication is not provided
by the facility subsystem but is supported in such a manner that
the SSCVT works as an anchor which is accessible from every
address space.  One way of communication is WAIT and cross
memory POST.  JES2 is an example of this method.

In a server address space (see Figure 4)

If the real work is done in a separate address space, it can also
be a different one from the subsystem address space.  This
address space is controlled normally by the subsystem address
space, ie it will be started, stopped, and possibly restarted after
an abend by the subsystem address space.  This solution is
often the best one if the functions are executed by an IMS BMP
or some other complex software product.


SYNCHRONOUS/ASYNCHRONOUS FUNCTIONS

Synchronous function

When control is returned to the subsystem caller, the work is
done and the result is available to the caller.  Normally this is
true if the function is executed entirely by the function routine.
If the work is done in a separate address space, the function
routine has to wait until the work is finished.  The response
time of the subsystem call may vary greatly and become very
long.

Asynchronous function

When control is returned to the subsystem caller, the caller
does not know whether the work has been finished or not, only
whether the request has been successfully queued for
processing.  This is often true if functions are to be executed in
the subsystem address space or a server address space.  The
function routine, for example, only adds data to a queue in the
CSA.  The response time of the subsystem call is short and
doesn't vary very much.


CALLING THE FUNCTION ROUTINES

Calling a function routine via the subsystem interface works as
if it had been called directly by BALR.  The function routine
returns control immediately to the caller, skipping the
subsystem interface.  Therefore, function routines should be
coded the same way as re-entrant subroutines.  Calling a
function routine doesn't require any authorization.  It's
sufficient to get the necessary authorization only at the place
where it is needed.  The return code contained in register 15 is
the return code of the subsystem interface.  Therefore a
function routine should always return zero in register 15.  The
return code of the function has to be set in the SSOB. There's
no problem in making another subsystem call in a function
routine.


LOAD MODULE OF FUNCTION ROUTINES

The load module containing the function routines must be
either loaded into the CSA or placed in the LPA.  The LOAD
macro, used as shown, works in either way.  It's not necessary
to change the program if the load module is to be loaded into
the CSA first (this is always true when testing) and will be
taken to the LPA later.  Note that in order to be loaded into the
CSA, the load module has to be linked with the attribute AC=1
into an APF-authorized library.

         .
         MVC   W_LOADL,K_LOAD
         LOAD  EPLOC=W_LMOD,GLOBAL=,EOM=,SF=(E,W_LOADL)
         .
         .
K_LOADP  LOAD  EPLOC=,GLOBAL=(YES,P),EOM=YES,SF=L
K_LOAD   EQU   K_LOADP,*-K_LOADP
         .
         .
         DS    0F
W_LOADL  DS    XL(L'K_LOAD)
W_LMOD   DS    CL8
         .

If the functions are deactivated because the subsystem is
terminated, function routines may still be executing.  Therefore
storage of the load module in the CSA must not be released (by
DELETE macro).  In order that storage is not released by the
operating system at end of task of the subsystem address space
(it's still possible that a function routine is executing), you
should code EOM=YES at LOAD.  If this is done and the
subsystem address space is executing as a batch job, storage
will not be released before the initiator has been stopped.  It is
very likely that at this time a function routine is no longer
executing.  To be absolutely sure, use ENQ/DEQ.

Another possibility is to use a counter, which every function
routine increments by 1 at the beginning and decrements by 1
at the end.  After deactivating the functions, the subsystem
address space has to wait until the counter reaches zero.


AUTHORIZATION

In most cases, function routines have to be APF authorized, for
example in order to switch into storage key zero.  APF
authorization of the subsystem caller is a serious restriction,
especially in the case of common subsystem functions everyone
may use.  The best solution is for the function routine to
receive APF authorization via a user SVC.  There is a frequent
need for this kind of SVC and it has already been described in
MVS Update several times.  Because it is possible to damage
system integrity this way, it's extremely important to check
whether the caller is allowed to be authorized.  In any case, I
would recommend using RACF, if it is installed.  The simplest
way is to define a special DSNAME for which the user SVC
executes RACHECK, eg:

         .
         .
         MVC   W_RACHKL,K_RACHK   move to GETMAINed storage
         RACHECK MF=(E,W_RACHKL)
         IF    (LTR,R15,R15,NZ)   not RACF authorized
         .
         ENDIF
         .
K_RACHKP RACHECK ENTITY=(K_DSN),VOLSER=K_VOL,CLASS='DATASET',          X
               ATTR=READ,DSTYPE=N,MF=L
K_RACHK  EQU   K_RACHKP,*-K_RACHKP
K_DSN    DC    CL44'SUBSYS.APF.SVC'  RACF resource: DSNAME
K_VOL    DC    CL6'DMYVOL'        dummy volume if generic DSNAME
         .
         .
W_RACHKL DS    XL(L'K_RACHK)
         .

Note that RACHECK has to be executed in 24-bit mode.

To reduce the probability of errors, switch into storage key
zero or supervisor state temporarily, immediately before it's
necessary, and switch back directly after.  Before returning
control at the end of a function routine, for security reasons it
is useful to check whether storage key zero is still erroneously
set in the PSW:

         .
         .
         SLR   R2,R2
         IPK   ,                  insert PSW key into register 2
         IF    (LTR,R2,R2,Z)      key EQ zero, error
         .
         .
         ENDIF
         .
         .


STORAGE IN THE CSA

For the SSVT and subsystem specific control blocks, which
have to be created in CSA, subpool 241 should be used.
Before a GETMAIN it's necessary to switch into storage key
zero by means of MODESET.  This storage may be read by
everyone, but it is write protected.  If there is data belonging to
subsystem callers, which is stored in the CSA because it will
be processed in the subsystem address space or a server address
space, consider also read protection to preserve integrity.  To
do this use subpool 231.  This is more expensive because
switching into storage key zero is required for reading as well
as writing.  Note that a FREEMAIN has to be coded for
storage in both subpools - it will not be released by the system.
Since storage in the CSA below 16 megabytes is often scarce,
it is better to use extended CSA whenever possible.


QUEUES

If subsystem requests are processed in a separate address space
it may be necessary to use queues.

For example, if the function is asynchronous:

¥   Caller's data will be stored into an element of a request queue (in CSA).
¥   When the processing address space is able to process a new request, an element will be moved from the request queue to the processing queue.
¥   When processing has been finished, the element will be removed from the processing queue and deleted.
If the function is synchronous:

o      The caller's data will be stored into an element of a
      request queue (in CSA).

o      The subsystem caller is waiting.

o      When the processing address space is able to process a new
      request, an element will be moved from the request queue
      to the processing queue.

o      When processing has been finished, the element (possibly
      now containing changed or new data) will be moved from
      the processing queue to the response queue.

o      The caller's wait will be terminated by means of a cross
      memory POST.

o      The element will be removed from the response queue and
      deleted, after data has been returned to the caller.

When terminating the subsystem, it may be necessary to wait
until all elements have been processed, ie removed from the
processing queue or the response queue.

This article will be concluded in next month's issue of MVS
Update when we shall be covering other aspects involved with
the development of an MVS subsystem.


Walter Wiedemann
Consultant (Germany)                               c Walter Wiedemann 1991

