MVS/XA Cross Memory Services

INTRODUCTION

Cross Memory Services (XMS) is a facility of the 370/XA
architecture implemented in MVS/XA that some people seem to
have trouble understanding except at a high level.  I think this is
due to confusion over a couple of the cross memory concepts.

Hopefully, in this article some of that confusion can be cleared
up.  My intention is to make the reader more familiar with the
way XMS is implemented and set up within MVS.  It is assumed
that the reader has a knowledge of XMS at a conceptual level at
least.  A thorough knowledge of XMS is also a boon for
understanding the fundamentals of ESA/370.

XMS - 370/XA PERSPECTIVE

From the hardware perspective, we will be looking primarily at
five types of data area: the ASN First Table (AFT), the ASN
Second Table (AST), the Authority Table (AT), the Linkage
Table (LT), and the Entry Table (ET).  The ASN refers to the
address space number, which is the halfword identifier which
MVS calls the ASID (see Figure 1).

There is one AFT for the entire operating system and its origin is
stored in control register 14 (CR14), bits 13-31.  This is a real
address and 12 zero bits must be appended to form the full 31-bit
address (eg if bits 13-31 of CR14 are X'03886', the AFT origin is
3886000).  This table is fairly small and only contains pointers to
several ASTs.  ASN bits 0-9 form the index into the AFT, while
bits 10-15 form the index to the AST.  This means that each AST
contains 64 AST entries (ASTEs).  Look at the first AFT entry to
find the ASTs for ASNs 0000-003F, the second for 0040-007F,
etc (see Figure 2).

The ASTEs contain the information necessary for an address
space to run (including the segment table origin).  For XMS, we
are interested chiefly in three fields: the Authority Table Origin
(ATO), the Authorisation Index (AX), and the Linkage Table
Origin (LTO).  The ATO and LTO pointers are, of course, real
addresses.

The AT is typically a 12-byte bit string (although it can be
longer), consisting of two-bit entries, which are indexed via an
AX.  An easy way to understand what the AT represents is to
think of it as the lock on the front door of your house (your
address space).  You want to let in only certain people (programs
from other address spaces) for security/integrity reasons.  Hence
only certain keys will unlock the door and allow access.  This key
is the AX owned by the person attempting to unlock your door
(establish cross-memory access to your address space).

The first bit of the AT entry, if 1, says that the requesting address
space can establish your address space as a Primary ASN (PASN),
assuming his AX points to the particular AT entry.  Establishing
your ASN as a primary ASN means that the requestor can issue a
Program Transfer (PT) instruction to your address space.  The
second bit of the AT, if 1, allows the requestor to establish your
address space as a Secondary ASN (SASN).  This means the
requestor can issue a Set Secondary ASN instruction (SSAR) to
your address space.

EXAMPLE

Your AT is 12 bytes long (X'300C00000000000000000000').  A
program running in ASN 0047 issues a SSAR specifying your
ASN.  His AX value is 6.  Is he authorised?  The answer is “yes”.
X'300C' breaks down to binary:

    00 11 00 00 00 00 11 00

The seventh AT entry (corresponding to AX=6) has value B'11',
meaning ASN 0047 is PASN-authorised and SASN-authorised (ie
SSAR is allowed).  Note that your AX value generally has nothing
to do with your AT.  Your AX value is used if you attempt to
unlock someone else's door (access a different address space).

The linkage table pointed to by the ASTE contains fullword
pointers to Entry Tables (ETs).  ETs consist of 16-byte ET Entries
(ETEs), which define routines to be executed via Program Calls
(PCs).  Important fields in an ETE include the ASN and entry
point that the PC routine will run, the PSW Key Mask (PKM) that
gives keys with which the program can run, and an Authorisation
Key Mask (AKM), which acts as the security mechanism for PC.
The AT and AX don't come into play with the PC.  In problem
state, the AKM is ANDed with the requesting program's PKM
and, if the result is zero, the PC will fail with a program interrupt.

Take for instance the case where the requestor's PKM is X'0080'
(ie key 8 only).  The AKM for the PC routine he is accessing is
X'FF00'.  Will the request succeed?  The answer is “no if in
problem state”.  0080 AND FF00 = 0000.  X'FF00' means only
keys 0-7 (system keys) are allowed in this case.

If the ASN in the ET entry is 0000, the PC represents a PC-
current primary (ie it isn't really a cross memory call and the
routine will run in the primary ASN address space).

How are program call numbers formed?  The indexing is very
similar to ASNs and the AFT/AST.  A PC number is 20 bits long,
with bits 0-11 forming the linkage index portion (LX) and bits 12-
19 forming the entry index (EX).  Therefore, the LX is 3
hexadecimal digits and the EX two (see Figure 3).  The LX is
used as an index from the LT origin, and the EX is used from the
ET origin.

PC 00506 breaks down to an LX=5 (the sixth fullword of the LT
for the issuer's address space), and an EX=6 (the seventh 16-byte
ET entry pointed to from the LT entry).  Note that for AFT
entries, AST entries, and LT entries, the high-order bit of the first
byte will be on if the entry is invalid.  ETs are defined in groups
of four entries and hence there may be unused entries.  Later we
will see how MVS handles this condition.

Generally, that is all there is to the XMS areas referenced directly
by the hardware.  Of course, some bits and bytes have been left
out, and the control register settings haven't been touched on.  Just
remember that each address space has associated with it a unique
ASN, with its own AT and AX, LT, and corresponding ETs.
These tables and values define the cross memory capabilities of an
address space.

MVS/XA IMPLEMENTATION OF XMS

First we will look at the control blocks and data areas as defined
by MVS.  A good control block map is printed in the MVS/XA
Debugging Handbook volume 1 in chapter 6, under the heading
PC/AUTH Control Blocks.  You should use this diagram as a
reference.

To start with, where will you find all of the cross-memory control
blocks and data areas in storage?  If you look for the ASN first
table, it is located in the private area of *MASTER* (ASID
0001).  The ASN second tables are located in the SQA below the
line.  All other cross-memory control blocks can be found in the
extended LSQA of the PCAUTH address space (ASID 0002).
The only exception is the System Function Table (described
below), which is in the nucleus.

MVS maps the ASTE with just that name, and it appears in
volume 2 of the Debugging Handbook.  For convenience, the LT
and AT origins are pointed to by the ASCB (with virtual addresses
instead of real).  The ASCB also points to the ASTE.

PC numbers must be unique system wide in MVS and hence the
LX portions of the numbers must be tracked so duplicates don't
occur.  Similarly, AX values must be known and regulated for
security purposes.  The method used for keeping track of LXs and
AXs is via the LXAT and AXAT tables, respectively, both
pointed at by the Cross Memory Directory (XMD).

The LXAT keeps track of which ASID owns an LX value and
how many address spaces are 'connected' to it.  An ASID becomes
the owner of a particular LX value (and hence the PC numbers
which are formed from the LX value) by issuing the LXRES (LX
reserve) macro.  If an address space owns an LX, it means that it
either has or intends to offer a PC routine for other address spaces
to use.

The AXAT simply is a small table which contains ASID numbers
of the owners of the AX numbers.  An address space becomes an
AX owner by issuing the AXRES (AX reserve) macro.

Other MVS control blocks worthy of mention are the Entry Table
Information Block (ETIB) and the Entry Table Information
Extension (ETIX) queues, which are pointed to by the XMD.
These blocks describe the entry tables for an address space (and
have virtual ET pointers).  For every 'connected' address space,
there is a pointer to it.

What is a connection?  Once a program has reserved an LX value,
it must create its own entry table parameters and tell MVS to set
up the information via the ETCRE (ET create) macro.  MVS does
not chain the ET entries to the LT entry anywhere until
specifically requested via the ETCON (ET connect) macro.  It is
simply the task of adding the LT entry (which points to the ET)
into the linkage table of the requesting address space.  If the PC
routine is to be 'public', MVS will ensure that every address
space's LT will be updated with this entry (in this case the LXRES
macro must be issued first specifying SYSTEM=YES).  Public LT
entries are added to the System Linkage Table (SLT), pointed to
by the XMD.

The AXSET and ATSET macros are used to define an address
space's current authorisation for issuing PT and SSARs, as
previously defined.  Before issuing a PC, a program should be
sure that its address space's AT will allow the PC-routine address
space to issue a PT back when it is done (ie if you're going to ask
a workman into your house to do repairs, you'd better be sure he
can get back out again, otherwise you will have trouble).

It is important to know that in MVS/XA having an AX value of 1
permits an address space full authority via the AT.  This is
because all ATs are defined to allow this (ie bits 2 and 3 of the
AT are B'11' always).  System address spaces generally have an
AX value of 1 (ie they are like building supervisors with the
master key).

Before looking at real-life examples, one last control block should
be examined: the System Function Table (SFT).  This simply
contains a list of PC numbers (composed of an LX and an EX) at
fixed offsets.  This is a flexible design needed to protect system
routines and facilities from having to know exactly what the PC
number is of the service they want.  Instead, they only keep track
of a fixed SFT offset.  See volume 1 chapter 5 of the Debugging
Handbook for a list of all PC numbers (and functions) which are
mapped by the SFT (Program Call Services in System Function
Table).

MVS/XA XMS EXAMPLES

Enough theory - who really uses XMS in MVS?  How many PC
routines actually exist?  I have investigated my own system to
determine who uses XMS and how they have set it up.

Most systems address spaces have AX = 1 giving them full
access.  Most other address spaces have AX = 0 by default,
meaning that they aren't  allowed to issue SSAR or PT and they
offer no PC routines of their own.

Any address space that will allow others with AX = 1 access via
SSAR and PT uses the AT known in MVS as the System AT
(SAT), which is pointed to by the XMD.  Most fall into this
category.  As far as system LXs go, my system usually has 17 or
18 active at any time (which boils down to the 9 defined in the
SFT plus 8 or 9 others).  As stated above, system LXs get
connected to all address spaces, and hence appear in all LTs.
Only privately used PC routines necessitate the use of a different
LT for each address space.

Finally some examples.  Let's look at the cross memory interface
between JES2 and the PSF address spaces, which controls PSF
printers.

Interrogating MVS/XA storage on my system reveals that JES2's
AX is 2.  Its AT is equal to X'30003C0CF000000000000000'
meaning AX values of 1, 9, A, E,10, and 11 are fully authorised.
Looking at the JES2 LT shows five LX values defined above and
beyond the 18 system LX values present in every address space's
own LT.  The LX values are hexadecimal 80, 81, 85, 87, and 8E.
Examining the ETs pointed to by the LT entries shows that there
are two valid ET entries per LT entry.  Hence, valid PC numbers
for JES2 to issue to PSF are 08000, 08001, 08100, 08101, 08500,
08501, 08700, 08701, 08E00, 08E01.

Note here that ETs are defined by the architecture to be 64-bytes
long, hence they hold four ET entries.  If only two are defined by
PSF, how can you tell if the remaining two are valid or not?  The
entry is invalid if the routine entry point in the ET entry points in
module IEAVXEPM (just look at a NUCMAP or in a dump to
verify the IEAVXEPM module location).

Each set of the two valid ET entries points to two different entry
points located in the private area of the PSF address spaces.  The
AKM value for both ET entries is X'C000', meaning the caller
(JES2) must have access to keys 0 and/or 1 to be able to execute
the PC.  JES2 has key 1 reserved for it by convention in MVS.

Now onto the PSF address spaces: investigation shows 5 PSFs up
and running.  Each has a unique AX value, and these values
correspond to the values defined in JES2's AT, eg PSF1 has
AX=9, PSF2 has AX=A, etc.

All of the PSFs have identical ATs allowing AX = 1 full access,
and AX = 2 SASN only authority.  All PSFs also have identical
LTs and they contain only the standard system linkage entries.

How should this information be interpreted?  It appears that each
PSF reserved an LX value via LXRES and defined two ET entries
via ETCRE.  ATSET and ETCON were done for JES2 to put the
LX in JES2's LT and to allow PSF access with their specified AX
values.  The environment will allow JES2 to issue PCs to each of
the five PSFs and also issue SSARs, with the PSFs as the
secondary address space.  The PSFs will execute the two PC
routines, and are allowed to issue PT back to JES2, and also issue
SSAR with JES2 as the secondary address space.

Let's look at one more example involving DB2 and CICS.  A DB2
subsystem involves three address spaces called IRLM (lock
manager), MSTR (system services), and DBM (database
manager).  The following information was found for these address
spaces:

IRLM: AX = 1 (AX = 8 reserved in AXAT).  AT allows AX = 1
full access and AX = 8 SASN access only.

MSTR and DBM: AX = 5 (AX = 6 reserved by MSTR in AXAT).
AT allows AX = 1, 5 full access and AX = 6 SASN only.

All three have standard LTs, including only system linkage
indices.  The LXAT indicates that MSTR has reserved LX values
of hexadecimal 6C, 6E-72, 74, 76, 79, and 7A.  DBM has
reserved 7B-7F.  IRLM has none reserved.

The one CICS address space we will look at has the following set:

AX = 6 and the AT allows AX = 5 full access.

The LT has defined LX values 6C, 6E-72, 74, 76, 79-7F, plus 45
as well.

The LXAT shows that CICS has reserved its own LX of 83.

This means that CICS has several PCs it can execute, to be run in
both the MSTR and DBM address spaces.  Because AX = 6 is
SASN-authorised in MSTR and DBM, CICS can also issue SSAR
(since its AX value is 6).  DBM and MSTR can, of course, issue
PT back to CICS and issue SSARs as well, since their AX = 5
value is found in CICS's AT.  IRLM, with AX = 1, has full access
everywhere, although it doesn't need any of the DB2 PC routines
(which aren't defined in its LT anyway).  Note that it isn't really
CICS code but the DB2 code residing in the CICS address space
that issues the PCs.

The LX of 45 defined in CICS is for OMEGAMON, which is
utilised at my installation.  The reserved LX of 83 by CICS turns
out to be for one PC routine in DFHXMP, the CICS program
responsible for cross memory access for Multi-Region Operation
(MRO).

Note that an AX of 5 is included in the AT of both MSTR and
DBM.  These two address spaces are allowed to issue SSARs and
PTs among each other, although there are no private PCs available
to each other.  Also note that investigation shows that there are
several other CICS/DB2 address spaces connected to this DB2
subsystem, and they all have AX = 6.

In examining my system, three other prominent users of PCs were
found: RMF, NetView, and CATALOG.

REFERENCE MATERIALS

A lot of details regarding XMS have been ignored here in order to
concentrate on the basic control blocks and data areas, the
authorisation mechanisms, and PC access structures.

To gain a more complete understanding, I suggest starting with
the following material.

1   MVS/XA SPL, System Macros and Facilities, volume 1
(complete description of MVS/XA services).

2   MVS/XA Principles of Operation (the hardware perspective).

3   MVS Update, Issue 13 (October 1987) (Writing a cross
memory program).

4   MVS Update, Issue 3 (December 1986) (Using MVS Cross
Memory Services).


Terry Cumming
Systems Programmer
Bank of Montreal (Canada) © Xephon 1989

