Guarding your MVS authorized libraries

MVS 'authorized' libraries contain 'authorized' programs that
have special powers. Typically, these programs belong to, or
are extensions of, the MVS operating system.

Authorized programs have the capability to bypass the security
software. Of course, legitimate programs in authorized
libraries, supplied by IBM and other software vendors, can be
trusted to perform their rightful functions.

The concern is, what happens if an intruder succeeds in placing
an illegal program in one of the authorized libraries?

For instance, a disgruntled employee may want to damage your
system, or a prankster, with malicious intent, may want to
plant a virus or some other bad code in your system.

These individuals will look for weak controls at your
installation and try to insert an illegal program into (or modify
an existing program in) one of the authorized libraries.
Authorized libraries are the prime targets of intruders wanting
to penetrate a system. In fact, to do any significant damage, a
program must first gain entry to an authorized library.

Once there, the illegal program can do any of the following to
your MVS system:

o      It can cause your system to 'crash' unexpectedly (by
      changing some of the system programs).

o      It can invalidate all your back-up copies on tape (by
      corrupting your disk back-up program).

o      It can cause unexpected things to happen at random (by
      deleting an insignificant MVS module or replacing it with
      bad code).

o      It can even slow down your entire machine.

And, yes, it is possible to insert, in an MVS system, computer
viruses, trojan horses, traps, or any one of the other harmful
bugs that have found their way into microcomputers.

Sounds frightening? Not to worry: there are sufficient
safeguards to prevent these and other mishaps. But it is up to
you to implement them.

Remember, if your authorized libraries are not closely guarded,
then you can institute all the security controls in your system
and still be vulnerable to an attack. Having security controls
but leaving authorized libraries unguarded is akin to closing all
your windows at night but leaving the front door wide open! So
what can you do to protect your system?

First, you must identify all authorized libraries. They are all
listed in the LINKLSTxx, IEAAPFxx, and LPALSTxx
members of SYS1.PARMLIB.

Next, you must take steps to ensure sufficient protection exists
for all authorized libraries found in the above members. To do
this, you will have to work with all the systems programmers at
your installation.

In particular, you should do the following:

1      Keep authorized libraries to a minimum.

2      Make sure all authorized libraries are protected by the
      security software. Only a few individuals in the systems
      programming group should be allowed to modify them.

3      Keep persons with WRITE or UPDATE access to
      authorized libraries to a minimum.

4      When an authorized library is added to the system, make
      sure it gets protected by the security software. When an
      authorized library is removed, ensure that the
      corresponding profile is also removed.

5      Use established change control procedures to add or delete
      an authorized library and to add or delete members within
      an authorized library.

6      Your security software is capable of producing security
      violation reports. Pay specific attention to violations
      against authorized libraries.

7      Conduct periodic reviews of all authorized libraries to
      determine their validity and to ensure there is proper
      security protection for them.


EXAMPLES

In addition to this, persons with special security powers should
be advised to guard their terminals when they are signed on.
Otherwise, your system is still vulnerable. Here are two
examples.

Example one

A hacker finds that someone with update access to authorized
libraries (a systems programmer, for instance) has left their
terminal signed on, but unguarded. The hacker walks to the
terminal and copies an illegal program from a private library to
an authorized library.

Remedy

MVS provides a facility to log off a TSO user automatically if
there is no activity on the terminal for x minutes, where x is
installation-specified. Set x to a reasonable value: 30 minutes
or less.

Example two

A hacker tells a systems programmer that they have an
interesting computer game and asks whether the system
programmer would like to play. The systems programmer takes
on the challenge. The game is in fact a 'trojan horse'. While
colourful graphics flash on the screen, the 'game' copies a
virus to an authorized library - behind the scenes, of course,
using the systems programmer's special privileges.

Remedy

People with special powers should be alerted to these types of
risks.


Summary

Security attacks can be prevented by safeguarding access to
authorized libraries, by conducting periodic reviews to ensure
control mechanisms are in place, and by instilling security
awareness among staff members with special security powers.

Dinesh Dattani
Independent Consultant
Maya Computer Consultants Inc (Canada)      c Maya Computer Consultants 1992

