Why should you consider switching to RACF?


Outline

This article describes the main considerations that apply to my
company with regard to security software and why we made a
strategic decision to change from CA-TOP SECRET to RACF.


Background

Traditionally, the area of security software for MVS has been
dominated by three packages, ie RACF, CA-TOP SECRET,
and CA-ACF2. As RACF is supplied by IBM, it has naturally
become the most widely used, but what has made third-party
security software so popular?

There are two main reasons. Firstly, until just a few years ago
RACF was known as user-unfriendly thus leaving a great
market for third-party vendors. Secondly, for many years the
use of security calls such as RACINIT, RACHECK, etc
evolved slowly and did not present third-party vendors with
any problems keeping pace with IBM.

IBM has now given RACF a long needed facelift which makes
it more comparable with CA-TOP SECRET, for example. IBM
has also integrated RACF very closely with SMS and
especially with DFP. Finally, IBM has increased the speed at
which new security calls are implemented tremendously, giving
third-party vendors huge problems.


Our problems

When my company was founded 11 years ago a decision was
made that we were to implement security using standard
security software. At that time CA-TOP SECRET was chosen
because RACF never seemed to be an alternative. With one
exception, CA-TOP SECRET served us well until late 1989
when we implemented Release 4.2. In 1985, TOP SECRET, as
it was known at the time, contained an expiration date and the
product suddenly expired one day without warning leaving us
with no security at all (I strongly urge people to put pressure on
their suppliers to remove that kind of booby trap from their
software).

When Release 4.2 of CA-TOP SECRET was put into
production in 1989 our problems began. We totally depend on
an installation exit in CA-TOP SECRET - that exit stopped
working. It was solved by applying a fix, and afterwards we
realized that this is the usual response to any problems with the
product.

We were running MVS/XA 2.2 and after this everything
remained stable until late 1990 when we converted our
database system from SYSTEM 2000 to DB2 (this was also a
strategic decision). The change to DB2 required a major
redesign of our installation exit in CA-TOP SECRET in order
to make it work again.

A change to MVS/ESA in early 1991 required a maintenance
upgrade, ie a complete replacement of CA-TOP SECRET. This
is the normal way regular maintenance is performed on the
product. Since then, the list of problems with CA-TOP
SECRET has been never-ending.

We started an SMS project including implementation of HSM
and ABARS. This has given us all sorts of problems, including
some fatal ones bringing our production system to its knees.

All these problems made us think - we have always had a
policy of not being in the frontline when it comes to
implementing new software releases. Although much is
happening in the SMS area we did not consider SMS that new.
CA-TOP SECRET was also geared for SMS - at least that was
what the vendor told us. Even a special CA-TOP SECRET
manual for SMS has been published.

Reality has now shown us that we were in fact quite advanced
using SMS together with CA-TOP SECRET, and using
ABARS for disaster back-up moved us further in front; in fact
we were amongst the first in Denmark . The first time we tried
to start ABARS we ran into problems with CA-TOP SECRET
not being able to handle some new security calls. When we
reported it, the vendor just asked: "What is ABARS?"

Generally the vendor's response to this fast moving area of
security calls is to ship a new maintenance tape every three
months. Applying a maintenance tape means a complete
replacement of CA-TOP SECRET which again means very
careful testing since the product keeps changing all the time, ie
new modules are added, some functionality changed - in some
cases without warning.


The future

With new functions such as data encryption and APPC that
depend on many new security calls, one must fear that this is
going to cause many problems for third-party vendors, similar
to those we have experienced with SMS. We have seen
indications recently that many other customers are having the
same worries as us. To my knowledge, at least four or five
CA-TOP SECRET and CA-ACF2 customers have switched to
RACF in Denmark alone.

With IBM's recent announcement of Enterprise Systems
Managed Storage (ESMS) we will see the SMS concepts
gradually extend to LANs and OS/2-based workstations. IBM
states that ESMS will be a key concept in future client/server
applications. We expect RACF to play a key role with respect
to protecting data on all the platforms that ESMS will
comprise.

Finally, the vendor of CA-TOP SECRET and CA-ACF2 has
started introducing CPU-id dependent passwords in all
products. This kind of password usually causes all sorts of
problems in PR/SM environments and when running on a
disaster recovery site.

Our conclusions from all this are:

1      When using third party security software you should stay at
      least one or two years behind to avoid problems.

2      It is difficult to do preventative maintenance on third-party
      security software even when you do not consider yourself
      to be in front.

3      We cannot accept a product so vital as our security
      software to be as unstable as we have experienced.

4      We do not trust the vendor to be able to keep pace with
      IBM.

5      We do not expect the vendor to keep two similar products
      ie CA-TOP SECRET and CA-ACF2 as separate products
      for all time. Inevitably the users will be forced into some
      kind of conversion process.

Steen Spuur Hansen
Systems Programmer (Denmark)                        c Xephon 1992

