Storage Automation Facility: a review

OVERVIEW

Storage Automation Facility (SAF) is an intelligent DASD
storage management system from Real Solutions Inc of Bay City,
Michigan. The intelligence is derived from the way that SAF
monitors your DASD pool(s) and performs your management
procedures only when they are needed and not at some arbitrary
time, as other storage management procedures require. This is
why I call SAF the missing link - with other storage management
products you can manually manage your DASD but with SAF,
becauseit monitors your DASD for you, you can truly automate
your storage management functions.

If this sounds like I'm high on SAF that's because I am. In nearly
15 years of systems programming experience, I've never before
encountered a software product that has been so well developed
and delivered so completely on its promises. The quality of the
code is amazingly error free while being extremely efficient.
Combine this with SAF's easy to use matrix specification
language and you can begin to see the excellence of the product.

The finishing touch that will make SAF indispensable in your
shop is that it doesn't directly do any dataset or volume
manipulation. SAF uses whatever storage management products
you already have. The obvious benefit is that all the investment
you already have in your storage management products, both
monetary and training, are retained. SAF just fills in the gap that
your current products cannot do and uses them to fulfil your
storage management objectives.

FEATURES

SAF monitors free space, VTOC and VTOC index utilization, and
space fragmentation. This shifts the burden of such monitoring
from the system administrator to SAF, which frees the storage
administrator to do more creative tasks. While performing its
monitor functions, SAF can send messages to TSO or CA-
ROSCOE users as well as the system console when predefined
conditions are met.

SAF allows intelligence to be brought to storage management.
Conditions based on combinations of the above monitoring as
well as time and date conditions can be used. For example, if you
want to submit your utility to reorganize a volume when a
fragmentation index of .350 is reached but not during the prime
shift, SAF can use a combination of fragmentation index and time
of day to determine if the utility should be submitted.

SAF does not directly manipulate any data but rather can initiate
any JCL, system command, CLIST, or REXX EXEC, that utilizes
any storage management product you already have. In our volume
defragmentation example, you could instruct SAF to submit JCL
at a certain fragmentation index. This JCL could be either IBM's
DFDSS or any other OEM vendor's product that would
accomplish the same function. This means you retain your
investment in existing software and training. Additionally, your
options for future software investment remain open since SAF can
work with any product.

SAF's ease of use is facilitated by a simple command language
that names storage pools and identifies an automation matrix to be
invoked to define the conditions (called action triggers) indicating
when a procedure should be initiated. The matrix concept is an
easy-to-use facility that consists of rows that identify procedures
such as idle space release or defragmentation and columns that
indicate under what conditions they should be performed such as
time of day, previous executions, or free space availability, among
others. This matrix is a concise and easy-to-use method that does
not require learning a new language.

With SAF monitoring the vital storage conditions, the storage
administrator is no longer required to wade through voluminous
reports attempting to decide what storage management procedures
should be utilized where. Instead, all that is required is a general
overview of conditions at the volume and pool level. SAF
provides this information in the form of a Pool Analysis Report.
This report lists the number of volumes in the pool, the pool
capacity, the free space percentage and amount, the fragmentation
index, and the utilization percentage and amount, and provides
totals of all amounts. You control pool grouping. If you wish, each
volume may be its own pool or pools may group volumes by
function or volume name similarities.

SAF is extremely efficient. It performs its monitoring and
automation routines with minimal use of CPU and storage
resources. In my shop, a 3090-300E with 57 3380-K volumes, the
Pool Analysis Report runs in 2.9 seconds utilizing 1.45 CPU
seconds. This amounted to a culture shock for me as I was
accustomed to waiting as much as an hour for reports on just a
subset of volumes, not the entire DASD farm.

SAF has parallel processing capabilities. This means you can set
SAF up to monitor as many pools or volumes as you wish at the
same time. Each pool may have different start/stop times as well as
separate target and threshold utilization levels. The same
automation procedures may be triggered at different levels on
different pools or different procedures may be used in each pool.

Dataset restores can be reduced because SAF's incremental
threshold management approach allows multiple stopping points,
which prevents archiving of too much data. For example, without
SAF, if you decide a volume is too full and you archive all
datasets unreferenced for 30 days, it may result in too many
datasets being archived and the volume now becoming too free.
Restore requests will now filter in and, depending on your set up,
may require frequent tape mounts. SAF provides multiple low
stopping points so that only enough data to relieve the full volume
condition is archived. By leaving as much data as possible on the
volume, SAF reduces the likelihood of a restore request occurring.

SUMMARY

As a user of the SAF product, I have been amazed at its efficiency
and error-free code. SAF installed quickly and easily without
incident and was easily set up to perform early warning
notification of critical DASD conditions immediately. If you did
nothing else with SAF but have it tell you when problems are
beginning to occur, you would be getting your money's worth but
you would not be utilizing SAF to it's fullest capability. I have
taken the time to tell you about SAF because I have been greatly
impressed by how it enabled me to fill in that missing link in my
shop's DASD storage management policy and I know it can do
the same for your shop.

Joseph R Grace
Senior Systems Programmer (USA)                                            c Xephon 1994

