Recent IBM announcements
Having introduced us all to Enterprise System Architecture/370 (ESA/370) and
given the first public airing to the concept of Hiperspaces in February, IBM has
now started to reveal more details of how the two will be effectively harnessed
in its own software products.  In April, IBM made a series of announcements
covering most of its major MVS subsystems in which it gave details of the nature
and scale of performance improvements its customers can expect to achieve
through this new technology.  In addition, Version 2 of DB2 was unveiled
delivering considerable performance gains and improved functionality.
MVS/ESA
MVS/SP 3.1 (MVS/ESA) will be generally available in August 1988 although the
major functions such as Hiperspace and data windowing services will not be
shipped until the end of the year.  IBM has differentiated between the two types
of Hiperspace that have been introduced.  Standard Hiperspaces can exist in
expanded storage, if it is available, or on auxiliary storage.  They can be
accessed through Assembler routines via new Real Storage Manager services or
through high-level languages via new data windowing services.  Expanded Storage
Only (ESO) Hiperspaces can, as the name implies, only exist in expanded storage,
never in central storage or on auxiliary storage.  They can only be accessed by
authorised programs.  The provision of this high speed data storage and
retrieval mechanism will be the basis for performance improvements across a wide
range of MVS subsystems.
Not to be overlooked in the latest announcements is the newly-introduced Virtual
Lookaside Facility (VLF).  This is a generalised facility for storing and
reading frequently-used data objects in specially-managed data spaces.  The
LNKLST Lookaside facility has been renamed the Library Lookaside Facility (LLA)
and has been extended to handle libraries not in the LNKLST.  LLA can now
identify the most frequently used modules in a library and place them into VLF
data spaces to improve program fetch times and reduce DASD I/Os.
IMS AND CICS
While simply running either of these subsystems under MVS/ESA will produce some
performance benefits, by using Hiperspaces even greater gains can be achieved.
Small Programming Enhancements (SPEs) to IMS/VS 2.2 or CICS/MVS 2.1 allow ESO
Hiperspaces to be used as extensions to the VSAM buffer pool for both native and
DL/I VSAM datasets.  This will allow the user to allocate file I/O buffers far
in excess of what is possible today.
DB2
DB2 has undergone extensive ‘hot spot’ analysis whereby IBM has taken the code
seen as contributing most to the overall path length of DB2 processing and
rewritten much of it more efficiently.  While many will argue that this is well
overdue, it has nevertheless resulted in Version 2 being a far slicker product
than Version 1 capable of much faster performance (438 simple transactions per
second on a dedicated 3090-600E under MVS/ESA).  The CREATE INDEX operation, in
particular, has been improved to such an extent that it is now at least nine
times faster in terms of elapsed time while consuming 35% less CPU time.
Functionality has not been overlooked and most sites will welcome the inclusion
of referential integrity as well as an audit trail capability and the new DB2
Resource Limit Facility, which allows installations to prevent DB2 queries from
using too much CPU time.
TSO/E
REXX, a high-level procedural language formerly only available under VM, is
supported under TSO/E Version 2.  This emphasizes the positions of both products
within IBM’s Systems Application Architecture framework.  Both REXX and CLIST
procedures can now be stored in VLF-managed data spaces in an executable form to
give improved performance.
     © Xephon 1988










