Security exposures and controls

IBM's MVS operating systems (SP, XA, ESA) have many
areas of concern to the data security officer.  If these are not
adequately addressed, the installation exposes itself to the
threat of computer viruses, theft, and fraud.  This article
discusses some major exposures and suggests remedies for
each.

TAPE BLP PROCEDURES

Exposure

MVS JCL gives users the option of bypassing the tape label
when processing a tape dataset.  By bypassing the tape label,
security checking is not performed, thus an unauthorised user
can read or destroy tape data.

Control

Restrict the use of the tape BLP option.  There are two ways to
achieve this:

¥   Specify JES2 parameters such that BLP processing is
allowed only via specified initiators.  Control the use of
these special initiators.

¥   Use the tape management system to disallow this option.

AUTHORISED LIBRARIES

Exposure

Authorised libraries are installation-specific.  Programs in them
have the potential of bypassing all security and destroying data.
Authorised libraries are specified in the following PARMLIB
members:

¥   IEAAPFxx
¥   LNKLSTxx
¥   LPALSTxx.

Control

Ensure there are security profiles protecting all existing
authorised libraries.  Implement formal procedures for adding
or deleting authorised libraries; these should include creating
and removing security profiles as necessary.  Conduct periodic
reviews to ensure everything is in place.

SYSTEM PARAMETER LIBRARIES

Exposure

PARMLIBs and PROCLIBs contain system parameters that are
used during system start-up.  If an unauthorised person updates
data in them, the system may start-up improperly, or even fail
to start-up.

Control

Ensure that security profiles exist to protect these libraries.
Specifically, keep to a minimum the number of people who can
update these libraries.  Establish change control procedures for
all updates to these libraries.

SYSTEM DATASETS

Exposure

Datasets starting with SYS1 are system datasets.  Together,
they constitute the operating system.

Control

Restrict access, especially UPDATE access, to all system
datasets.  Generally, only the system programmers need to
update system datasets.

STARTED TASKS

Exposure

These are initiated from a system console.  Started tasks, if not
properly protected, can bypass security software to access, and
even destroy, important data.

Control

Use the security software to protect all started tasks.  Identify
all started tasks and assign to each one appropriate access,
using the security system.  Make sure that, for each entry, a
started task exists in PROCLIB.  Institute procedures for
adding and removing started tasks.

PROGRAM PROPERTIES TABLE

Exposure

The programs mentioned in the Program Properties Table
(PPT) may have special powers.  They can bypass normal
security software processing and checking.  Obsolete or
unnecessary entries in the PPT may result in unauthorised
programs gaining special powers.

Control

Examine all entries in the PPT and make sure each entry is
justified.

IEHINITT AND IMASPZAP PROGRAMS

Exposure

IEHINITT is the tape initialisation program than can destroy
tape labels and therefore data on tape.  IMASPZAP can modify
the contents of a program.  Both these utilities have the
potential to cause damage by bypassing security controls.

Control

Use the 'program protection' feature of the security software to
restrict access to these programs.

MVS CATALOGS

Exposure

If an MVS catalog is destroyed, it can result in widespread
disruption of service.  The MVS master catalog is critical,
because all dataset searches are funnelled through it.  The
master catalog, if properly protected, can also enforce dataset
naming standards (eg by checking the first-level qualifier).

Control

¥   User catalogs: use security software to ensure that only the
system programmers are permitted to delete user catalogs.

¥   Master catalog: ensure that only the system programming
staff are permitted to modify or delete a master catalog.

SYSTEM EXITS

Exposure

System exits, such as SMF or JES exits, are provided by IBM
to modify the operating system, using standard interfaces.  The
intended use is to tailor the operating system environment to
suit an installation.  The use of system exits should not be
discouraged.  However, since they alter the operating system,
their use and implementation must be controlled.  Otherwise,
there is room for a time-bomb or a virus to creep in.

Control

Ensure proper controls and procedures exist for installing
system exits.  Ensure source code for system exits is always
available.  Examine the source code to ensure there are no
time-bombs.  Use SMP to install all exits.  This will ensure
system software integrity.

SMF DATASETS

Exposure

SMF datasets contain, among other things, security logging
records produced by the security software.  If the SMF datasets
are not protected, a user can modify the records to falsify
security information.

Control

Use the security software to protect the SMF datasets.  Do not
allow anybody WRITE or UPDATE access to these datasets.
Writing to SMF datasets should be done by a special program,
using program pathing.  Institute procedures to archive SMF
datasets.

SMF RECORDING

Exposure

The security software produces SMF records for its logging.
Other system events and activities also generate SMF records.
Therefore, many different SMF record types are produced.
However, the system allows an installation to specify which
SMF record types are to be collected, and which discarded.
This leaves open the possibility that important SMF records
may have been suppressed.  If records produced by the security
software are suppressed, for instance, security violations may
go unnoticed.

Control

Ensure the member SMFPRMxx in SYS1.PARMLIB collects
records produced by the security software and other records
required by an installation.

SYSTEM LOG

Exposure

The system log dataset (SYSLOG) contains a log of all system
activity.  Among other things, RACF violations and other
messages are sent to SYSLOG.  The information contained in
SYSLOG is useful in tracking down certain events after they
have occurred.  For this reason, it is essential to have the
SYSLOG available for at least the last few days.

Control

Collect SYSLOG data and archive it at least daily if not more
frequently.  A GDG with ten generations will allow the
viewing of the last ten days' log, assuming a daily collection
cycle.  Make sure the GDG is protected by the security
software to allow read access, but not modify or delete access.

TSO TERMINAL TIMEOUT

Exposure

If a TSO terminal is left unattended, anyone can go to that
terminal and use the TSO user's powers to access the system.
A terminal may remain signed on, but unattended for a long
time, leaving open the possibility of abuse.  This can be
especially risky when a person with special powers leaves his
(signed-on) terminal unattended.

Control

MVS provides a mechanism to automatically log-off a terminal
session that has been inactive for x minutes, where x is
installation-specific (member SMFPRMxx in PARMLIB).  Use
this option to log-off a terminal automatically if it has been
inactive for 30 minutes for example.

VOLUME PROTECTION

Exposure

Some volumes contain sensitive information.  It may be
desirable to allow only some individuals to look at the VTOCs
of these volumes to prevent the misuse of the information.

Control

Use the security software's volume protection controls to ensure
that unauthorised users are not able to view the contents of
these volumes.

TSO ACCOUNT AUTHORITY

Exposure

This authority allows a person to view and update records in
SYS1.UADS, which contains profile records and information
for all TSO users.  With a security software package, this
information can be stored in the security database.  However,
there may still be a need to store some information in
SYS1.UADS for back-up purposes.

Control

Assign the ACCOUNT authority judiciously.  Minimise the
number of people who have the TSO ACCOUNT attribute.

TSO OPERATIONS AUTHORITY

Exposure

This attribute allows a person to enter some MVS commands,
such as being able to display initiators.

Control

Minimise the number of people who have the TSO
OPERATIONS attribute.

SECURITY SOFTWARE ALWAYS ACTIVE

Exposure

At IPL time, the system may have been tailored so that it asks
the operator if the security software is to be active.  This allows
the operator to remove the security software from the system.

Control

Make sure the security software is always active in the system
by tailoring the system so that, at IPL time, the security
software is automatically started and there is no option to shut
it off.


Dinesh Dattani
Computer Consultant (Canada) © Dinesh Dattani 1989

