MVS/ESA processor storage performance

The aim of the following article is to give some ideas on
MVS/ESA processor storage performance, which I felt may be
of interest to other readers. As always with performance rules
of thumb, there is usually no single number that is the correct
one for everyone, and it is necessary to find the right number
for each installation. The figures I will be giving will,
hopefully, be a good guide to start from. I will start off talking
about expanded storage and will follow that with information
on central storage.

Expanded storage has two measurement values presented by
RMF. Neither gives an accurate measurement of expanded
storage usage but both give a guide to the contention present
for it. Migration age (found on the paging activity report of
RMF I) gives the length of time that the oldest page has been in
expanded storage without being used or migrated. It has been
stated by some people that this value is of no use and might as
well be ignored. However, I believe that this is not true,
particularly as it is this value that the SRM uses when making
decisions relating to expanded storage.

It is true to say that there is little relative difference between
having a migration age of 300,000 and having one of 3,000.
Both values indicate that there is no significant contention for
expanded storage. The value of 300,000 could mean that there
is one page that was sent to expanded storage but was never
referenced and, as little or no migration has taken place during
that time, has remained sitting in expanded storage. The value
of 3,000 shows that maybe a little migration has taken place
but there is still plenty of available expanded storage. Once the
value regularly drops below 600 then there is contention for
expanded storage and action should be taken. A figure of 150
is probably as low as one should dare go.

Once there is significant pressure on expanded storage there are
several courses of action that can be taken. One option is to
acquire more expanded storage. Alternatively, one could
change some of the SRM parameters to force the paging of
some workloads directly to auxiliary devices, thus relieving the
contention on expanded storage. It could be argued that batch
testing should always be paged directly to auxiliary devices as
there is little to be gained from using expanded storage.
Personally, I would page batch testing to expanded storage
until such times that I felt that there was noticeable contention
and then I would switch.

To set a workload to page directly to auxiliary, one has to set
up the required ESCT...(n) parameters in the OPT to 32767,
where n is a unique subscript on the OPT and is greater that 2.
The domain definition for that workload in the IPS should have
the parameter ESCRTABX=n added.

The other measure for expanded storage is the page migration
rate (found on the paging activity report of RMF I), which is
the rate at which pages are migrated to auxiliary devices. This
is perhaps the better value to give a guide to the contention for
expanded storage. As a 'rule of thumb', a regular value of 30
pages a second is a reasonable number to accept as a threshold
value. Below this, there should be no problem. When the value
regularly exceeds this it is important to monitor your system to
see if there is any unacceptable degradation. It could be that
some systems could suffer a higher migration rate with no
degradation to the system performance.

The number to measure any contention in central storage is the
average Unreferenced Interval Count (UIC), which measures
the time that a page frame remains in central storage and is
unreferenced. The average UIC figure is found in the paging
activity report of RMF I. The maximum value is 255, and the
lower the number the greater the pressure on central storage.
The significance of the number rather depends on whether the
installation has expanded storage or not. It should be
mentioned at this point that many of the default values of the
SRM assume that no expanded storage is present. So if no one
at your installation has looked at the SRM since before you had
expanded storage installed, I would suggest that someone
should start work on updating it.

If there is expanded storage present, then, once the value
regularly dips below 30, action is required. With expanded
storage, a low UIC value may not cause any problems at all.
Much depends on the workload and some installations can run
with a very low UIC and with little noticeable degradation of
their system. The key is really how much processor power one
is prepared to allow for paging between central storage and
expanded storage and, likewise, between expanded storage and
auxiliary storage. It is suggested that no more than 2% of each
engine be used for paging between central storage and
expanded, and a similar threshold is used when measuring the
processor power required to page between expanded storage
and auxiliary storage. The paging activity report in RMF I
again gives the important numbers, namely the number of
pages written to and read from expanded storage and the
migration rate.

The following formulae can be used for calculating the amount
of processor used for paging.

Assuming it takes 133 pages per second to use 1% of the
processor, the percentage CPU required to page between
central storage and expanded storage is:

(No of Pages Read from Expanded Storage +
                           No of pages Written to Expanded Storage)

                        (133 * No of Engines)

There are two values required to calculate the percentage CPU
used to page between expanded storage and auxiliary storage.
The first is the amount required to move pages and the second
is the amount of CPU required to manage the paging. It should
be noted, however, that the figure calculated to manage paging
is only an approximate value. It assumes that the SRB value for
performance group 0 (taken from the workload activity report
of RMF I) is gained purely for paging. This is not strictly true. The formula is as follows:

(Migration Rate / (133 * No of Engines))

+ ((SRB for Performance Group 0 / (SRB Service Definition Coefficient *
SUs/Sec * Capture Ratio * No of processors * Elapsed Time in Seconds))*
100)

There are some parameters in the OPT which are used for
controlling storage and it is only necessary to use a few of
them. The first one I would mention is RCCCPUT, for which I
would definitely override the defaults and set it to (128,128),
thus switching it off. This parameter is effectively saying "the
CPU is busy, let's save storage and start swapping jobs out."

It seems strange to control the processor storage resource by
depending on the CPU value. There might be a couple of CPU-
intensive jobs using all of the processor but using little storage.
Do you really want to add to the processor contention by using
it to page? If the CPU is running at over 100% CPU utilization
then the dispatching priority parameters of the IPS should be
controlling CPU contention.

With expanded storage, logical swapping is virtually
unnecessary since the time it takes to retrieve a page from
expanded storage is negligible. This can be switched off to
save central storage by setting LSCTUCT to a relatively high
value of, say, (100,140). The beauty of this parameter is that
the SRM notes that you want to stop logical swapping but takes
no action until it finds that there is too much contention for
central storage and feels the need to physically swap. The
RCCUICT gives the SRM the value that the UIC value can fall
to before MPL adjustments are made. With expanded storage
this value can be set quite low. The default is (2,4), which is
probably too low. The value I use for my current installation is
(10,15) and I have experienced no problems at all. One needs
to lower this value until a problem is met, then revert to the
previous value. One will then know how far one is able to push
it.

John Larry
Performance Analyst
Zurich Insurance Co (UK)                               c Xephon 1993

