Determining VSAM buffer allocations

Specifying the proper amount of VSAM buffer space has continued to mystify most
applications programmers and a significant number of systems programmers as
well.

Allocating space can be done by three parameters all of which may be specified
in the AMP parameter of the JCL:

¥    BUFSP
¥    BUFND
¥    BUFNI.

Buffer space may be specified during file allocation and will be used if no
other values are specified during execution.  Unless it is specified during
cluster definition, this value will default to enough space for one index buffer
and two data buffers.  This is almost never enough!

The use of BUFND (data buffers) and BUFNI (index buffers) will always be used to
allocate buffers unless they are less than the BUFSP value specified during file
definition.  The primary drawback to using these two parameters is the inability
to account for changes in the file's index structure should this occur (eg if
the index goes to three levels).  In addition, these values must be correct
before the desired objective can be accomplished.  The following guidelines
should be used.


DATA COMPONENT

For direct processing two data buffers should be adequate.  For sequential
processing specify enough buffers to hold approximately two tracks of data.


INDEX COMPONENT

For direct processing use a value equal to the number of index set records plus
1, while for sequential processing, use a value of 1.

It is important to note that sequence set records are always brought into
storage one at a time and therefore cannot all be kept in storage.

Specifying BUFSP in the JCL is probably the best overall solution for the
problems most environments will encounter.  VSAM will use this value even if it
means reducing buffers to the minimum (if less than the minimum is specified an
error is generated).  The advantages of this parameter require less detailed
knowledge of the file to maintain good performance.  Since many COBOL programs
open VSAM files using DYNAMIC, it is not always easy to determine the processing
requirements without a significant amount of research.  The rule of thumb should
be:

     BUFSP = (# of Index set records) + 1 * (Index CISIZE) +
             (# of DATA CIs/TRK * (Data CISIZE)

This will allow an adequate number of index buffers for direct processing and
enough data buffers for sequential processing.  VSAM will be able to adjust the
buffer allocation within this specification if the file is opened for direct or
sequential processing.  Note, however, that once the file is opened, VSAM will
not re-adjust buffer usage.


ADDITIONAL HINTS AND WARNINGS

1    Remember SHROPTIONS can impact buffer usage and negate various changes,
even making things worse.  SHROPTIONS(4) causes buffers to be re-read for each
CI.

2    The RECOVERY option generates numerous I/Os due to pre-formatting of
control areas during LOAD operations.  SPEED should always be used.

3    Monitor file statistics and Control Interval/Area splits.  Each CA split
causes new index records to be created and can cause additional index levels.
This will occur even if there is not a significant number of new records, since
each CA must have an index record.

4    Ensure that your index Control Interval size is large enough to avoid
multiple index levels from being created.

5    Use the IMBED option.  Searching for the data can be a significant
performance cost.  Additonally, if there are enough index buffers and the
sequence sets are imbedded there is no reason to separate data and index
components onto separate volumes.

6    Ensure that free space specifications can be used.  Calculate the
percentages to determine if they will actually hold a record.  In a very dynamic
file, specify more CA free space than CI free space.  For mass sequential
inserts, the free space values are not used.  In other words, the percentage of
free space will be maintained throughout the mass insert and not used to contain
the inserted records.  In this situation, specify free space during file load
and then use ALTER to change the free space to (0 0), which will enable VSAM to
use this area.


Gerhard Adam
Manager, Large Systems
NBD (USA) © Gerhard Adam (1987)





































