A user’s view of the NAS 7900
INTRODUCTION
This article describes the experience at a medium-sized site in installing and
running a NAS 7900 semiconductor disk in a production environment over a period
of four months, continuous use.
The article centres on the practical aspects of using a device of this type and
ends with a brief discussion of the wider issues of purchasing and running it.
The description of the purely technical features of the hardware is brief, as
full information on these matters is easily obtainable from the supplier.
SUMMARY
The NAS 7900 solid state disk is a storage device with response times of 0 to 8
msec as measured by RMF.  Its main purpose is to provide fast response times
(relative to conventional electro-mechanical devices) on critical datasets.
Our short-term requirements of the device were two-fold:
•    To serve as the main paging device for time-critical on-line applications.
•    To help forestall an incipient virtual storage constraint by enabling us to
make memory-resident buffer areas disk-resident.
These objectives were achieved in the main, although under MVS the device has
features that are not altogether satisfactory.  One of these, which is MVS
dependent, might conceivably be improved upon in a future release of the
operating system.  The other is a hardware dependency, for which relief has
already been promised by the manufacturer.
7900 HARDWARE OVERVIEW
Main characteristics
The features of most interest to the user are:
•    Measured response time: 0 to 8 msec
•    Disk sizes: 4, 8, 16, or 32MB
•    Access mode: equivalent performance for read and write
•    Devices emulated: 3380, 3350, 3330-11
•    Internal back-up: on built-in Winchester disk
•    Power supply: optional battery for emergency back-up
•    Moving parts: in back-up disk only
•    Hardware configuration: Figure 1 is a schematic representation of the
minimum configuration.  Some details have been omitted for the sake of clarity.
Comments
•    7970 disk controller.  The two directors are independent and their external
features are similar to those of a 3880 (or NAS 7880) controller.
•    Winchester disk.  This is a back-up device to which the contents of the
solid state working device are written at power-off, or when a power failure is
sensed by the device.  At power-on the solid state device is re-loaded from the
disk by default.
•    Battery.  The main purpose of this optional attachment is to provide a
period of continued operation in the event of a back-up disk malfunction.  The
solid state device can then be backed up on tape or conventional disk before
shutting the 7900 down for repairs (we did not install one).
SITE CHARACTERISTICS
Ours is a two-mainframe site serving a medium-sized SNA network.  The most
important on-line applications execute in two CICS regions.  They are used
extensively throughout the network.  Another application of growing importance
is an Information Centre presently implemented on FOCUS/TSO.  Details of the
configuration are summarised in Figure 2.
Notes
•    7380s are NAS plug-compatible 3380s.
•    IDMS is our central database system.
•    ADS is an on-line program development environment executing under IDMS.
•    TSO/FOCUS is used to support the Information Centre.
•    MSX is a poor man’s CTCA.  It performs a subset of GRS function and is
implemented in software, the two mainframes communicating by means of a dataset.
This is very heavily utilised and was placed on a 7900 in an experiment
described below.
PROBLEM AREAS
Excessive paging
The production system was experiencing demand paging rates of about 65-70 pages
per second, caused by a shortage of real storage.  While this is not considered
excessive for MVS it impacted the CICS and IDMS response times.  These are both

single-task applications, which makes them sensitive to paging, even at low
rates.
Virtual storage
An incipient constraint was beginning to make itself felt in the IDMS region.
This was executing at the time in a nominal region of 6.8MB while actually
requiring about 7.5MB.  It was obvious that a further expansion of network size
or IDMS-based on-line applications would in time cause a permanent constraint
condition.  This could lead to a freeze on expansion, service interruptions, and
ultimately a hasty conversion to XA, all of which were considered unacceptable.
SOLUTIONS
The obvious solution to a real storage shortage is to add more real storage -
under the circumstances described above an addition of 8MB would reduce the
paging rate by about 50%, which would have been ample for our needs.  This
however was not immediately practicable: the required memory expansion was not
available as soon as we wished and even had it been the constraint condition
would remain unresolved.  It was also felt that a device like the 7900 would be
at our disposal and operational even after the installation of a new CPU, while
the memory expansion would be a loss apart from a marginal increase in the re-
sale value of the old machine.
These considerations led to the installation of a 7900 with a capacity of 64MB.
The initial configuration was to be as follows:
•    48MB (six ‘3380s’ of 8MB) - for local page dataset on the production
system.
•    16MB (two ‘3380s’) - for IDMS production buffer areas.
•    This left room for the placement of a number of small, heavily-used
datasets, which we could experiment with.
INSTALLATION AND OPERATION
Installation
From a system programmer’s point of view this is no different from that of a
regular disk device - the macros used in IOGEN and IOCP are identical.  There is
a minor difference during initialisation.  As the system ‘sees’ a regular device
the initialisation must include the allocation of a dummy dataset, which
corresponds in size to the non-existent space on the physical device.  This is
quite straightforward and is adequately described in the manual.  Alternatively,
the initialisation can be done stand-alone by initialising the disk as a VM
mini-disk using the MIMIC option.
The disk sizes (4, 8, 16, or 32MB) and emulation mode (3380, 3350, or 3330) are
defined in the hardware at installation time, or when a change is needed.
Operation
The device was put in production as outlined above and has remained practically
unchanged since.  A summary of performance characteristics as experienced by us
is shown below in Figure 3.
PERFORMANCE BENEFITS
As stated in the summary our objectives were in the main achieved:
•    CICS response time: 1.4 secs on the average, down from 2.3 before
installation.  This amounts to a 40% improvement (approximately).
•    Virtual storage savings: about 600K, by allocating IDMS buffers to the disk
instead of to core.  No measurable performance degradation of IDMS was
experienced.
ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS AND FINDINGS
The following trials were made, using space made available for the duration of
the trial.  Somewhat to our surprise none resulted in a measurable response time
improvement, although these were reported from other installations and could
also be expected according to theory:
•    Allocating PLPA to the 7900 (this was tried both for the production and the
test systems)
•    Allocating CICS temporary storage
•    Allocating the MSX index dataset
One can only assume that having these datasets on a conventional device did not
constitute a bottleneck.
Contrary to our expectations the following did not occur:
•    An increase in the paging rate
•    Increased CPU overhead due to the above.
SHORTCOMINGS
In spite of the undoubted benefits that the device has yielded in our
installation so far we found it has the following weak points.
Undirected paging
Before elaborating let it be stated that this is specific to 7900 page datasets
under MVS.  Unlike VM, MVS has no ‘preferred page’ option that assigns specific
paging devices to selected applications.  How then can one direct the paging of
critical subsystems to the 7900?  NAS offer the following guidelines:
•    ASM will take care of most of the problems, as its algorithm will in any
case tend to favour the faster device (within space limitations).
•    Bring up the 7900 page datasets by a PAGE ADD command after MVS is up and
running, rather than declaring them in IEASYSxx.  This will keep them from being
utilised in a comparatively unproductive way at IPL time.  Instead they will be
used by the important active applications.
•    Reduce the number of page datasets on conventional devices.  This will tend
to increase the probability of a given page going to the 7900, all other things
being equal.
Our experience shows that this works at least in a quantitative sense.  The 7900
datasets are 100% full most of the time and absorb about 35% of the total paging
while occupying only about 20% of the local paging areas.  The response time
improvements too speak for themselves.
The process is nevertheless a rather haphazard one as there is no prior
certainty that it is really CICS (or whatever) using the 7900 and not some long-
running batch job.  The alternative is to have enough 7900s to take care of all
the paging, but any installation except a very small one will most likely find
this prohibitively expensive.
Inflexible configuration
This problem also arises when the 7900 is used for paging.  At the time of
writing the configuration of the solid state device followed these rules:
•    All logical disks must be the same size.  One cannot have some 8MB and some
16MB disks even though this might be advantageous.
•    All disks must run in the same emulation mode.  A mix of (say) 3350s and
3380s is at present not supported.
These limitations are a disadvantage when part of the device is to be used for
paging and part for other datasets.  3330s are the best emulation mode for
paging datasets (see Figure 4 below) but may not be practicable for files of
data.  It is reasonable practice to keep back-up copies of 7900 datasets on
conventional disks in case a failure of the 7900 occurs, but how many
installations today still operate 3330s?
Insufficient space utilisation
This occurs when page datasets are allocated to emulated 3380s and 3350s and is
not a design fault of the 7900.  It is mentioned as the price of storing a page
effectively goes up by about 25% (see Figure 4 ).  There will be no under-
utilisation if the disks are used for data and the allocation is made in tracks.
The unused spaces can be broken down as follows:
•    1 track - track zero
•    1 track - VTOC
•    1 cylinder - recovery area for a VSAM-owned disk
•    Some waste due to the fact that 8MB is not an exact multiple of cylinder
size and that page datasets must start on cylinder boundaries.
As can be seen most of the under-utilisation is inherent in MVS.  Areas whose
size is negligible on a regular disk become very noticeable on the emulated
3380s and 3350s.
PRODUCT EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
The 7900 is a useful addition to the hierarchy of storage devices.  Given its
fast access time (which judging by our experience conforms to the supplier’s
specification) its best feature seems to be versatility.  It can be used for:
•    Storing critical datasets
•    Trading-off I/O and disk space for virtual storage
•    Trading-off I/O and disk space for real storage
It can be argued that MVS is not the ideal operating system under which to use
the 7900 for page datasets but this is a point that every potential user will
have to decide for himself.  Although we had no direct experience it is quite
likely that this function is better served under VM or a virtual storage
constrained DOS/VSE system.
Another open question is whether the 7900 will retain its usefulness under
MVS/XA or the future VM/XA.  Here again every installation will have to decide
for itself.  The facts remain that, even under XA, systems require very fast

access times for some datasets, and that they are as likely to develop a real
storage shortage as before XA.
Is a 3880 with a cache an alternative to a 7900?  I think the two systems have
different functions and the characteristics are not comparable.

Zvi Neumark (Israel)     © Zvi Neumark 1988




























































