Sam, some recent history to accompany the (attached) updated
TSSOSS09 module (for file 404).

Thanks.
-Mike Mayne

-------- Original Message --------
Subject: Re: TSSO and Abend 0C4 during MLWTO processing
Date: Tue, 18 Nov 2003 17:06:35 -0500
From: Peter Vander Woude <pwoude@harristeeter.com>
To: <mmayne@chattanooga.net>, <edjaffe@phoenixsoftware.com>
CC: <mmayne@hhsys.org>

Mike,

  As a side benefit, it appears that this change also corrects a
"small" problem with the #.RELOAD.  After I had submitted my
changes to correct the RELOAD processing so it actually loaded
the new AOF table, I had noticed that issuing a #.RELOAD command
was forcing me to re-ipl the system due to, if I recall, abend
0c4's at various places that were not nice!

  Just tested the reload command and I did not have to ipl my
test system.

Peter I. Vander Woude

Sr. Mainframe Engineer
Harris Teeter, Inc.



"Cathie M. Mayne" <mmayne@chattanooga.net> 11/17/2003 9:35:00 PM


I will do so ASAP.  At the present time, I'm still in the throes
of OS/390 V2R10 -> z/OS V1R4 (goes into Application test in 2
weeks, and if all's well it goes production the second Sunday in
December (cross your fingers)).  I'm embarrassed to say it, but I
knew about this, and I think it may have been a bug that *I*
introduced when I created the change to fix the SDSF problem.  It
kind of highlights my point about the code needing rework,
though.

Thanks, Peter and Ed.  I'll keep you posted...

-Mike

"Edward E. Jaffe" wrote:

Peter,

Thanks for finding and fixing this.  Mike Mayne is currently doing
some work on TSSO, so I've copied him on this note. It sounds as
if he should probably retrofit your fix into his version. Eh
Mike?

Regards, Ed Jaffe

Peter Vander Woude wrote:

Ed,

     Not sure if you're the right person to be e-mailing about a
small TSSO issue, and the correction I found, but here goes.

     Since I put TSSO into production, I have been having a small
issue with it in the fact that I have the message IEA611I in my
TSSO AOF table to 1) suppress the message from the console, and
2) start a STC that will notify tech services that the svc dump
was taken.

The issue was that during the processing, a ABEND0C4 was being
generated in the IEFJRASP processing.  I finally got around to
looking at the svcdump from the ABEND0C4 in IEFJRASP.  In looking
at the TSSOSS09 code, I found that the abend was occurring on the
TM WMNMML1,WMNMML1C instruction (right after the SEDOLM1 label).

Further analysis showed that the ICM R15,B'1111',WMNMNX2
instruction, right below the SEDOLMXX label was using R10 as it's
base.  This confused me because R5 is established previously as
the base for the WMNM dsect.     That was until I spotted the POP
USING statement about6 or 7 lines above the SEDOLMXX label.  When
I move the POP USING down below the last reference to any WMNM
fields, then the logic no longer generates the ABEND0C4.

All the analysis was done with the most recent file 404 from the
CBT tape site.

If you have any questions, or want me to ship you the slightly
modified TSSOSS09 code, just drop me a note.

Thanks,

Peter I. Vander Woude

Sr. Mainframe Engineer
Harris Teeter, Inc.

--

Michael R. Mayne
Systems Programmer III
Huntsville Hospital System
101 Sivley Rd. SW
Huntsville, AL 35801-4470
(256) 265-9012

