

       Bell Communications Research



       subject: TSSO Release 4.2 Product      date: July 1, 1985
                Content
                                              from: M. A. Schare
                                                    (201) 981-2796




       INTRODUCTION

       The Time  Sharing  Subsystem  Option  (TSSO)  is  a  package
       designed to increase operations and end user productivity by
       providing TSO-like services to the  MVS  operator,  and  MVS
       console  services  to the TSO user. TSSO can greatly enhance
       an installations efforts to efficiently control and  operate
       MVS   by   automating  most  operational  procedures.   This
       document describes the  changes  to  TSSO  in  Release  4.2.
       Knowledge of TSSO concepts is assumed.1

       Version 4.2 of the Time Sharing  Subsystem  Option  provides
       enhancements  over  the previous release in five main areas.
       They are:

         1.  The TSSO Operator Productivity Facility (OPF) has been
             enhanced  by  providing a facility whereby a CLIST can
             invoke an MVS, JES2 or VTAM command,  and  obtain  the
             response to the command in CLIST variables. Many other
             enhancements were made to OPF, and  are  described  in
             detail below.

         2.  TSSO now interfaces with the RACF  and  ACF2  security
             packages.  By  requiring  operators  to  "logon" using
             these  interfaces,  TSSO  provides  several   security
             enhancements.  Access  control  for MVS consoles using
             TSSO  commands  are   implemented.   The   appropriate
             security  system  is  called  to verify the userid and
             password. At the highest level of security, TSSO  will
             block  all  operator  commands  until  the console has
             identified  itself  to   TSSO.   This   will   provide
             operations  accountability.  Details  of  the security
             interface are provided below.

         3.  TSSO 4.2 is the first version of TSSO to provide  end-
             user  capabilities.  A  subset of the OPF enhancements


       __________

       1.  M.  A. Schare, Time Sharing Subsystem Option (TSSO) Sys-
           tems Programming Reference Guide, August 29, 1984












                                  - 2 -



             documented below are  available  to  TSO  users.  This
             provides a TSO user with the ability to issue any MVS,
             JES2 or  subsystem  operator  command.  The  scope  of
             commands  is  controlled  through  bits  in  the  User
             Attributes Data Set (UADS).

         4.  TSSO 4.2 supports version  7.1  of  the  PDS  command.
             These  two  public domain facilities work in tandem to
             provide tools for  recovering  MVS  systems  in  cases
             where  a  major  subsystem fails. PDS 7.1 provides the
             capability  to   replace   strings   in   members   of
             partitioned  datasets. TSSO provides the capability to
             accomplish this replacement from an MVS console,  even
             if  JES  or  VTAM  will  not initialize. This can be a
             life-saver for single CPU shops.

         5.  Lastly,  TSSO  4.2  provides   enhancements   to   the
             Automated  Operator Facility (AOF). Two new parameters
             on the  AOF  TABENTRY  macro  provide  for  additional
             flexibility.

       ENHANCEMENTS_TO_THE_OPERATOR_PRODUCTIVITY_FACILITY_(OPF)

       In  previous  versions  of  TSSO,   all   operator   command
       processing  occurred after execution of the command or CLIST
       concluded. Queueing of  operator  commands  in  this  manner
       restricted  CLIST  functionality  by  preventing  them  from
       reacting to the results of operating system commands.   TSSO
       4.2  provides  new  interface  to the MVS command subsystem.
       Five new TSO commands exploit these  interfaces  and  expand
       CLIST  capabilities  by  providing synchronous access to the
       MVS command subsystem.

         1.  The OSCMD provides the ability to issue an MVS command
             from  an  executing CLIST. The response to the command
             is  optionally  returned  to  CLIST  variables.  These
             variables  may  then  be interrogated by the CLIST and
             appropriate   action   taken.    Details   of    OSCMD
             processing,  and  the input and output CLIST variables
             it uses, are in the TSSO users guide.

         2.  The OSWTO command may be used to send a message to the
             MVS operator. This is useful to provide instruction to
             the console operator during execution of the CLIST (as
             opposed  to  the  CLIST  WRITE  statement,  which will
             display a line AFTER the CLIST terminates).

         3.  The OSWTOH command is the same as  OSWTO,  except  the
             message is hilighted on the MVS console.













                                  - 3 -



         4.  The OSASK command is  used  in  a  CLIST  to  ask  the
             operator  a question (via WTOR) and place the response
             into CLIST variables. The CLIST variables may then  be
             interrogated.   This   command  allows  the  CLIST  to
             establish a dialog with the MVS operator.

         5.  The OSPAUSE command is used to delay  CLIST  execution
             for  a  specified number of seconds. This is useful if
             the CLIST initiates a started task, and must wait  for
             it to initialize.

       These 5 commands, together with the OPF component  of  TSSO,
       provide an installation with a tremendous range of tools for
       automating  almost  any   operational   task.   A   complete
       description of these commands may be found in the TSSO users
       guide.

       TSSO_SECURITY_ENHANCEMENTS

       In previous versions of TSSO, any MVS console could use  the
       TSSO  subsystem  to  issue potentially hazardous TSO or TSSO
       commands. For example,  a  console  defined  as  "INFO-ONLY"
       could  issue  TSO commands through TSSO, or reload a new AOF
       table.  TSSO  Version  4.2  contains  numerous  enhancements
       designed  to  alleviate these problems, and optionally add a
       level of security and  accountability  to  the  MVS  command
       subsystem.    The    following    section   summarizes   the
       enhancements.

         1.  The TSSO subsystem provides three levels of  security.
             These are:

               a.  MINIMAL - TSSO functions as it did  in  previous
                   versions.  For installations with RACF security,
                   a default user id can be specified  through  the
                   RACFID  parameter  at  TSSO startup. Any console
                   may issue  any  TSO  command  through  the  TSSO
                   subsystem.  Lastly,  no ACF2 support is provided
                   at this level.

               b.  MEDIAL  -  TSSO  requires  an  MVS  operator  to
                   "LOGON" to TSSO using the new "#.LOGON" command.
                   TSSO will then associate that console  with  the
                   user  id.  Any commands or datasets accessed via
                   TSSO by  that  console  are  executed  with  the
                   authority  associated  with  that  user  id. The
                   MEDIAL   security   level    is    useful    for
                   installations  wishing  to  protect MVS datasets
                   from access through  the  TSSO  subsystem.  Note
                   that  the userid and password required for LOGON
                   are  checked  via  the  RACF  or  ACF2  security











                                  - 4 -



                   system.  Under  this level, no controls over MVS
                   commands are enforced.

               c.  MAXIMAL - At the highest level of security, TSSO
                   will  block  all  operator  commands  at a given
                   console until the operator logs on  to  TSSO  as
                   described above. This forces each MVS command to
                   be accountable down to a  unique  RACF  or  ACF2
                   user  id. In addition, if this level of security
                   is selected, consoles will "time out"  (e.g.  be
                   logged  off)  after  an  installation  specified
                   number of minutes of inactivity. This  level  of
                   security  is intended for installations who wish
                   to maintain a high level  of  control  over  MVS
                   operations.

         2.  Regardless of the security level selected above,  TSSO
             Version  4.2  provides a facility to protect sensitive
             TSSO control commands (e.g.  #.P)  from  execution  by
             unauthorized   consoles.   TSSO   will   not  allow  a
             "sensitive"  command  to  be  issued  from  a  console
             without  "system" authority, as defined in MVS: System
             Commands.

         3.  The OSCMD facility is secure in that  consoles  cannot
             use  OSCMD  to  issue a command with a higher level of
             authority then the original console.

       END-USER_PRODUCTIVITY_BENEFITS

       Many of the commands mentioned under  OPF  improvements  are
       available  to  TSO users. An "authorized" TSO user may issue
       any MVS, JES2 or subsystem  command.  An  unauthorized  user
       will  be  able  to  issue  any command which is valid from a
       "display  only"  console.  These  facilities  are   provided
       through  the  OSCMD  command. If the OSCMD command is issued
       from the TSO command line, the  response  from  the  command
       will  be  returned  to  the terminal through TSO PUTLINE. If
       OSCMD is invoked from  a  CLIST,  the  command  response  is
       returned through CLIST variables.

       The OSASK command is also available  to  the  TSO  end-user.
       This  command  allows  the  end-user to "ask" the operator a
       question, and retrieve the response, either at the  terminal
       through PUTLINE, or into a CLIST variable.

       The  reader  is  referred  to  the  TSSO  users  guide   for
       information  concerning  these  facilities.  The  OSCMD is a
       safe, powerful alternative to the TSO  status  command,  and
       provides  a  state of the art interface between the TSO user
       and the MVS command subsystem.











                                  - 5 -



       TSSO_RECOVERY_ENHANCEMENTS

       TSSO Version 4.2 does not  contain  additional  facility  to
       allow  for recovery of MVS systems in the case where JES2 or
       VTAM has failed. The "enhancements" are realized through the
       interfaces  with  the  PDS command, a public domain facility
       written by Bruce Leland. The PDS command has the  capability
       to  replace  one  string  with  another  in  any member of a
       partitioned data set. This command ,like  any  TSO  command,
       executes   under   the   TSSO   subsystem,   providing   the
       installation a powerful utility  in  the  case  of  a  major
       subsystem  failure.  The PDS command provides numerous other
       facilities for recovery in these situations. The  reader  is
       urged to obtain a copy of the PDS command (Version 7.1) from
       the Connecticut Bank and Trust (CBT) mods tape.

       ENHANCEMENTS_TO_THE_AUTOMATED_OPERATIONS_FACILITY_(AOF)

       Two new parameters are available on  the  TSSO/AOF  TABENTRY
       macro.  The  ECHO parameter provides a facility whereby TSSO
       will display or log commands as they are  being  trapped  or
       executed, and the MATCHLIM parameter allows the installation
       to specify the maximum number of times a TSSO ACTION  should
       be taken.

         1.  The ECHO parameter enables the installation to  record
             TSSO  ACTIONS  on  the MVS console, or the MVS SYSLOG.
             This provides a degree of  accountability  within  the
             TSSO  subsystem.  The MVS command or reply is directed
             to the MVS master console (or optionally, the hardcopy
             log).

         2.  The MATCHLIM  parameter  supports  environments  where
             TSSO   is   used   to  automatically  restart  failing
             subsystems (such as VTAM) by trapping the  termination
             messages  and  issuing the appropriate start commands.
             The MATCHLIM parameter dictates the  number  of  times
             that  TSSO  should perform the ACTION specified in the
             TABENTRY macro. Once the MATCHLIM  has  been  reached,
             TSSO will ignore the AOF table entry.

         3.  The final enhancement to the AOF is  the  addition  of
             the  ALTAOF command. ALTAOF will dynamically reset the
             MATCHLIM value for a given AOF table entry to a  value
             specified  in the ALTAOF command line. This provides a
             good deal of flexibility for installations  attempting
             to   duplicate   the  recovery  efforts  of  the  High
             Availability Systems Lab (HASL) as documented  in  IBM
             manual  ZZ05-0413-00:  Improving  IMS  Availability  -
             Techniques for Automating  the  Recovery  Process  for
             Selected  System  Failures.   Note  that resetting the











                                  - 6 -



             MATCHLIM value to zero effectively deletes the entry.

       MISCELLANEOUS_and_SUNDRY_ENHANCEMENTS

       As can be imagined, TSSO has undergone a considerable amount
       of  change  since  the  previous  release.  This  effort has
       brought about many enhancements that do  not  fit  into  the
       above categories. These are summarized here.

         1.  TSSO has been restructured. The number  of  processing
             modules  has  doubled. This should provide for orderly
             growth in future versions.

         2.  The Subsystem Support Module (TSSOSSSM) has been split
             into two modules, one for handling subsystem interface
             code 10 (operator commands) and one for handling  code
             9   (WTO  messages).  The  new  SUBSYS  initialization
             statement allows an installation to specify these, and
             other  subsystem  interface  codes.  This  removes the
             burden of establishing subsystem entry points from the
             programmer.

         3.  TSSO messages are now more uniform. The general format
             of message is

             TSS a nnn s

             where "a" is the TSSO module issuing the message,  nnn
             is  a  unique  message  identifier,  and  "s"  is  the
             severity of the message.

         4.  TSSO control commands are now parsed,  providing  more
             flexibility  in  command  syntax. As a result of this,
             the syntax of all QUERY  commands  has  been  slightly
             altered.

       TSSO_4.2_PLANNING

       A design philosophy prevalent throughout TSSO is a desire to
       use  only standard MVS interfaces. Because of this, TSSO 4.2
       has  additional   software   pre-requisites   and   planning
       considerations.  These are summarized here:

         1.  TSSO uses a  subsystem  allocatable  console  for  the
             OSCMD interface. This console is "virtual" in a sense,
             but must be added to the MVS IOGEN stage 1 input deck,
             and  a  gen must be performed. Refer to the "PLANNING"
             section in the TSSO users guide.

         2.  The OSCMD and  OSASK  commands  place  responses  into
             CLIST  variables.  These  commands use a new interface











                                  - 7 -



             provided with TSO/E  Release  2  to  accomplish  this.
             Therefore, TSO/E Release 2 is a pre-requisite to using
             these commands.

         3.  MVS/SP 1.3.2 or above  is  still  a  prerequisite  for
             TSSO. The minimum level of MVS/XA is 2.1.1.

         4.  The RACF interface requires RACF Version 1, Release 6.
             The minimum ACF2 level is 4.0.

       CONCLUSION

       This document summarizes the enhancements made  to  TSSO  in
       Version  4.2.  Any and all comments, complaints, suggestions
       or requests may be directed to the author at (201) 981-2796.



                                     M. A. Schare


