                 CDCSA MVS CROSS SYSTEM FACILITY

Overall Description.

     The CDCSA MVS Cross System Facility is an ISPF application
which is designed to help maintain a standard MVS Residence Pack
to be cloned and used by many separate LPARS.  The application is
constructed to keep proper documentation of the maintenance levels
on each system that is being run.  There are some other aspects of
this system, as you can discover while you examine it.

     This system makes life much easier in our internal
service bureau environment that is commonly found nowadays in
state governments, large city governments, and corporations that
have combined separate data centers.  They are now running LPARs
instead, at a single large site.

     We also have a CICS and a DB2 adaptation of this system.  I
have now put them on the CBT Tape.  CICS is now on Files 210 and
211.  DB2 is now on Files 212 and 213.

     Some of the overall philosophy of this system is documented
in the SCRIPT file which is on CBT Tape File 205.

     The way we have it here, each LPAR gets a common MVS Res Pack,
at a certain (two-digit) maintenance level.  This res pack can be
"cloned" from any one pack to any other pack.  From the "XSYSALC"
clist (which calls up panel "XSYSPNL"), the option M, for
Migrations, will generate the res-pack cloning JCL.  As part of the
cloning procedure, new SMP/E target zones are created, which reflect
the levels of the contents of all the system libraries on the pack.

     It is up to each installation to decide which datasets they will
keep on the common res pack, and which ones will go on the PARMLIB
pack that is unique for each LPAR.  The list of datasets on our common
res pack for the MVS/ESA 4.3 system, is included as member RESPACKD on
this file.  The list of datasets on the PARMLIB pack is included as
member PRMPACKD on this file.  This may help give guidelines on "what
to put where".  Generally, common SMP-maintained libraries go on the
res pack.

     The uniqueness of each LPAR is provided by a separate pack
(maintained "by hand") which has SYS1.PARMLIB, SYS1.PROCLIB, the
system master catalog, the IODF, etc.  We are, at this writing,
running MVS/ESA Release 4.1 in production, soon to go to Release 4.3.
I have included a member called PARMLIB which contains a few selected
SYS1.PARMLIB members.  Please note the order of the LINK list and
LPA list concatenations.  System specificity can still be propagated
on a common res pack, depending on the order of these concatenations.

     Each service level is created on Test Res Packs, of which
we have several.  These are the packs that the SMP is done to.
We IPL them as test systems under VM.  Once a given maintenance level
is frozen, the appropriate test pack is cloned to a production res
pack that is IPL'ed, pointing to the production PARMLIB pack for its
uniqueness.

     A word about naming conventions:  Most of the members of this
pds:  CHANGES, CLIST, etc. are IEBUPDTE-unloaded pds'es themselves.
They can be properly restored using the PDSLOAD program from File
093 of this tape.  A sample PDSLOAD job is member $PDSLOAD on this
file.  PDSLOAD will restore each member's ISPF statistics.  If you
use IEBUPDTE, the ISPF statistics will not be stowed.  The original
name for each of these pds'es was prefixed by XSYS.MVSESA.
Therefore, the original name for the library whose name here is
CLIST, was "XSYS.MVSESA.CLIST".  You get the point.  These full
names will be mentioned throughout this package, and you must make
global changes to the XSYS.MVSESA prefix to adapt the package to
your own system's naming conventions.  Member LEVLLIST came from a
PS dataset called XSYS.MVSESA.LEVEL.LIST, which was maintained by
hand.

     All 80-byte LRECL pds'es from the package have been made into
members on this file.  There was one other pds, called XSYS.MVSESA.
SCRIPT, whose LRECL is 147 and which will be separately placed in
File 205 of the CBT Tape.

     To set up this package, look at member XSYSALC in the CLIST
library.  The CLIST "XSYSALC" sets everything else in motion.  Things
start from there.  It should be obvious how the libraries ought to be
set up.  As we mentioned before, you have to make global changes
to the dataset prefix names when you set this up on your own system.
To my knowledge, these names are hard coded.  If you think some of
the ingredients are missing, please call Sam Golob at 212-206-5847 or
at 908-901-0943.

     From the XSYSPNL panel, option D browses a pds called XSYS.PGMDIR
where we have put our IPO1.PGMDIR members.  Option E invokes ISPF 3.4
against prefix XSYS.MVSESA.*.  Option IVP invokes ISPF 3.4 against some
datasets named XSYS.---.IVPLIB, which contain jobstreams to test the
new systems in various LPAR environments.  These datasets are not being
included here.

     I think the most immediately interesting part of this system
is the M option to generate the JCL that does the res pack cloning.
The other things are convenient add-ons in my opinion, although
I am glad they are there.

     To run the cloning jobs, you have to set up the CHANGES library,
because this library is automatically updated every time you run a
cloning job.

     This package was written by Joel Perlman and Ken Tomiak at
CDCSA (Computer and Data Communicatons Services Agency) of New York
City, while they were working for IBM and under contract to New York
City.  All the requisite permissions for inclusion on the CBT MVS
Utilities Tape, to my best knowledge, have been granted.

     Ken Tomiak was an employee of CDCSA, as was I.  (Neither of us
is there any more.)  Please contact:

   Sam Golob
   P.O. Box 906
   Tallman, NY 10982-0906

 email: sbgolob@attglobal.net
        sbgolob@aol.com

