
          PDSLOAD has now been further enhanced to handle any LRECL
          for both fixed-length and variable-length records.  The
          LRECL of the input sequential data set can but need not
          match the LRECL of the output partitioned data set.

          When the output PDS has fixed-length records, the input
          file may have fixed-length or variable-length records.
          (Text files transferred from PCs often go to variable-
          length record files on MVS.)

          When the output PDS has variable-length records, only
          variable-length record input data is acceptable.

          Undefined record format files cannot be used for input
          or output.

          The minimum input LRECL is 80.  The minimum output LRECL
          is 1 (plus 4 for RDWs, if present).

          PARM=NEW is used to specify that, like IEBUPDTE, the input
          control+data stream is to be loaded from SYSIN, instead of
          SYSUT1.  In any event, if an OPEN for SYSUT1 does not open
          successfully (and no abend occurs) the OPEN is retried with
          SYSIN as the DDname.

          PARM=SPF can still be used to generate ISPF "statistics".
          SSI information will be lost when this is selected.  The
          "userid" of generated stats is 'PDSLOAD'.

          John Kalinich's Y2K windowing fix allows for 2-digit years
          below 66 to be deemed to belong to the 21st century.  This
          is necessary because the PDSLOAD stats format on the ./ ADD
          statement only allows for 2-digit years.  (Generated stats
          did not have a Y2K bug.)

          The SPF stats current record count will always be set from
          the record count processed by PDSLOAD, even when this differs
          from the data supplied on a ./ ADD card.  Other data will not
          be overridden.  Apart from the userid, supplied stats are now
          verified to consist of numeric characters.

          The asterisk (*), question mark (?) and percent sign (%) are
          now treated as generic character placeholders for member
          selection.  The three mask characters function identically,
          and cause a match for the corresponding byte position of
          the member name.  Thus, S(ABC****X) will select all members
          beginning with 'ABC' and ending in 'X' in the eighth byte,
          and S(****) will select all members with names no longer than
          four non-blank characters.

          The IBM OS utility DDname override parameter can now be
          used by PDSLOAD.  The SYSIN, SYSPRINT and SYSUT2 "slots" are
          relevant.  (This was done to facilitate dynamic invocation
          from the REVIEW TSO command.)  See the leading comments in
          the source code for more information on DDname overrides.

          Parameter order is 'NEW,SPF,S(********),UPDTE(><)' for
          example.  Unwanted options can be omitted, but the order
          is fixed.


       Greg Price    20 April, 1999

