
RPF: Rob's Programming Facility - Introduction

RPF is a software product, which runs on a S/370, S/390 and
z/Series mainframes. It is available in TSO under the operating
systems MVS, MVS/XA, MVS/ESA, OS/390 and z/OS.

RPF is intended to be used by experienced people, who have a good
knowledge of IBM mainframes and mainframe operating systems.

RPF is for use with 24-bit and 31-bit MVS operating systems (MVS
3.7 and above).

RPF is written in S/370 assembler, though assembly with
Assembler-H (IEV90) and the High Level Assembler
(ASMA90) will give also good results.

Roots of RPF

RPF was developed because in the 1980's we did not have a "state
of the art" editor in MVS. IBM has a beautiful editor in TSO
called ISPF. My employer did not choose to pay for ISPF because
the standard editor was Roscoe. ISPF was too expensive and TSO
was not used very much in those days.

When I started to work at this employer I had a TSO background
for many years. So I felt that I needed a fullscreen editor in
TSO and MVS. That was the reason to develop an editor by myself.
I wrote the fullscreen editor (RPF) in the evening hours on my
employer's computer. My employer permitted me to use the computer
for this project.

After months of development and programming, the first prototype
of RPF was available for testing. Many collegues tested RPF and
reported bugs and suggestions to me. Finally RPF became available
for production. For many years we worked with RPF continued to
improve it in subsequent releases.

In 1984 MVS and TSO became so common that my employer decided to
pay for IBM's ISPF product. Until the 1990's we used both RPF and
ISPF. After a few years ISPF had replaced RPF and RPF was not
used anymore. At that time I decided to stop the development of
RPF.

In the famous year 2000, the S/370 and S/390 emulator Hercules
became available. With Hercules you are able to run MVS and its
successors on a PC platform. The first version of Hercules ran
only in Linux. Later, the Windows version became available.

Suddenly I and many other "Herculeans" had the availability of a
mainframe on our own PC's.

IBM decided to make MVS 3.8J available for common use, so you
don't need to pay license fees anymore for the base MVS. However
ISPF was not available for public domain use, because ISPF is
still used and is a copyrighted product.

MVS/TSO without a full-screen editor is not a very good option,
so I decided to make RPF available to Hercules users running MVS
on their personal computers. Desiring to make a full-screen
editor available for myself and these users, I restarted
development of RPF.

Functions of RPF

RPF consists of one version: RPF. RPF runs on all
operating systems listed above.

RPF is started in TSO as a command processor. After logon to TSO,
the command "RPF" is sufficient to have all the functions of RPF
available to you.

The functions of RPF are:

    Edit of data sets with a record length up to 255 bytes, like
    parameter decks and source-code of programs like PL/1, Cobol,
    Fortran and last but not least Assembler and other data sets.

    Browse/View files and members of Partitioned Datasets (PDS),
    output listings and loadmodules.

    Compile (assemble) of Assembler source code and to link-edit
    the code to executable programs.

    Creation (allocation) of MVS data sets and Delete of MVS data
    sets.

    List the Volume Table Of Contents (VTOC) of DASD volumes.
    Also you can browse, edit, delete, uncatalog, catalog and
    compress (PDS only) datasets in a "dataset selection list"

    Execute TSO commands. The last 10 TSO commands will be kept.

    Edit, Browse, delete and replace Librarian and Panvalet
    modules and ARCHIVER items. Librarian is a product of
    Computer Associates. Librarian is not a part of RPF. Only the
    free-to-distribute FAIR routines of Librarian are used.
    Panvalet is also product of Computer Associates (Broadcom)
    and is not a part of RPF too.
    ARCHIVER can be downloaded from cbttape.org (file 147)

    Move and Copy of PDS members.

    RESET or Delete ISPF statistics.

    SEARCH strings in sequential or partitioned dataset.

Installation of RPF

RPF is distributed on an AWS format tape. AWS is an Hercules
emulated tape, that can be run on a Hercules emulated system.

The installation JCL can be downloaded here. The zip file
containing the AWS tape of RPF is here available for download.

You can also download the RPF user's guide.

RPF has 31 bit capabilities

In the meantime I am busy with a new release of RPF for MVS38J
and MVS/380, MVS/XA and higher, with help of Paul Edwards. He has
created a set of macro's to accomplish 31 bit addressing mode.

For MVS38J I have made an SMP4 usermod, which can be downloaded
from http://www.prince-webdesign.nl/rpf (at the bottom of this
page). This usermod can be applied on top of MVS38J TK4- or TK3.
This usermod installs 31 bit addressing in MVS38J.

A new release of RPF has been created with amode 31, so you can
edit data sets or members up to 1 million records. RPF supports
large screens up to 16384 bytes.
And EDIT supports data sets and members with a RECFM of fixed and
variable records with a records length between 40 and 255.
And a SEARCH function has been added to search character strings
in a sequential or partitioned data set.
RPF 1.8.5 will replace older releases of RPF.

The rpf186.aws is a standard labeled  tape with vol=ser=RPF186 and
contains 6 files.

    file1 = unloaded IEBCOPY, dsn=TAPE.V1R8M6.SRPFASM
    file2 = unloaded IEBCOPY, dsn=TAPE.V1R8M6.SRPFLOAD
    file3 = unloaded IEBCOPY, dsn=TAPE.V1R8M6.SRPFHELP
    file4 = unloaded IEBCOPY, dsn=TAPE.V1R8M6.SRPFJCL
    file5 = unloaded IEBCOPY, dsn=TAPE.V1R8M6.SYS1MAC for MVS38J
    and MVS/380 users only, move these macro's to SYS1.MACLIB or
    place  <hlq>.SYS1MAC as first library in the SYSLIB
    concatenation
    file6 = unloaded IEBCOPY, dsn=TAPE.V1R8M6.SRPFOBJ

Current releases

RPF 1.8.6                        January     2021
RPF 1.8.6  load JCL              January     2021
RPF 1.8.6  User's Guide          January     2021

