Subject:  CBT contribution: ISPF Client Server Tool Box
From:     James A Halley <jhalley2@csc.com>
Date:     3/5/2014 3:33 PM
To:       sbgolob@cbttape.org

Hello Sam,

I've been using CBT materials for much of my nearly 40 years in
mainframe IT.  Thank you.

My ISPF Client Server Toolbox was written to make it easier for
people to use features of IBM ISPF Client Server.

The attached ZIP file contains an XMIT file that can be uploaded
and received into a PDS or PDS-E.  (This pds was already made from
the zip file and the XMIT file.   SG)

The one PDS will contain clists, REXX execs, ISPF panels and
messages.  It contains an instructional MS document that can be
downloaded and tailored.  It contains a batch procedure, sample
JCL and a REXX exec that is meant to run as a purely batch job.
One member is a ZIP of the current version of the ISPF
Workstation Agent install file that is fully compatible with
Windows 7 and is supplied for those on a z/OS prior to 2.1 or who
do not have the relevant APAR that provides it.

The available functions are described in the help member -
DNLDHLP1.  The $README member describes how to deploy the other
members and how to "test drive" the interactive components
without moving any of the components to other libraries ...
SYSPROC, ISPPLIB, ISPMLIB, etc.

This toolbox has become very popular and its use is required in
some departments of my organization.  It allows doing things like
displaying reports on SDSF in Microsoft Word, Notepad and WordPad
and emailing reports on SDSF with Microsoft Outlook.  It allows
downloading reports from SDSF, DSLIST, etc. to one of four paths
menu selectable paths in either interactive or batch mode.

A relatively small amount of code was "borrowed" from Lionel
Dyck's SDSFPAGE and acknowledged in the comments.

Gilbert Saint-flour provided advice and encouragement when I
first started on this endeavor several years ago.

The XMIT and its contents has been tested by Bruce Koss of Wells
Fargo.  Bruce has been a recent presenter at Share.

An alternate and more permanent email address for me is:
jimhalley627@gmail.com

Thanks!
Jim Halley

