Subject:  My "final" update to File 908 - ISPF Client Server Toolbox
From:     James A Halley <jhalley2@csc.com>
Date:     5/22/2015 9:42 AM
To:       sbgolob@cbttape.org

Hello Sam,

I have just one more update to my ISPF Client Server Toolbox
which will likely be the final one.

There are a number of small changes and some signficant changes.
Performance of the edit macros used to download files and reports
from edit sessions including from SDSF has been dramatically
improved by using ISREDIT REPLACE logic instead of REXX stem
logic.  Stem logic continues to be used when the edit macros are
invoked in CA Librarian ELIPS edit sessions since, although ELIPS
"looks" like ISPF Edit, it is not compatible with ISREDIT
REPLACE.  Occasional abends of these edit macros have been
eliminated.

The new OPENWITH command functions as a line command on DSLIST
and as an edit macro in edit and view sessions to download a file
to a PC workstation, open a Windows Explorer window and prompt
the user to open the file with the Windows program of his choice.

The OUTLOOK command has been changed to a more generic sounding
and easier to remember "EMAIL" and logic has been restored to
issue an error message if a user supplies a PC Workstation file
name that is not compatible with Microsoft Windows.

The Microsoft Word instructional document (member WORDDOC1) has
been extensively revised as have the $README and the help panel.

So ... I'm finally satisfied with the way this toolbox works.
OK, I'll never be totally satisfied with it but it is rewarding
to see 100+ people at my organization relying on these tools
daily.

My "permanent" email address continues to be jimhalley627@gmail.com

I left the "DATE", "NOTE", etc. members you created previously in
the PDS and assume that you will want to modify or replace them.

Please let me know if you find any issues with the attached file
and I will make corrections as soon as possible.

Thank you again for keeping the CBT going!

Regards,

Jim Halley

