The components I sent are easily installed.  Just put them in a
dataset allocated to SYSEXEC and they should work.

3 of the components are subroutines used by the main commands:
     @CURSOR  - Subroutine which returns information about the
                location of the cursor.
     @DATA    - Returns the data on the line the cursor is on.
     @CONVERT - Performs numeric conversion within the SUM command.

The commands are as follows:

SNIP -     Use this command to cut a piece of code without cutting
           the whole line.  Goes over multiple screens.
           Best used when the command is put behind a PF KEY.

           In EDIT or VIEW mode, place your cursor at the upper
           leftmost part of the code you want to cut out within
           your dataset.   Press your "SNIP" key.  Next place your
           cursor at the lower rightmost corner of the data you
           want to cut.  Press the "SNIP" key again.  You have
           just cut that section of code to your profile.

           If you continue to use the SNIP command, the data will
           be appended to the end of your profile.

SNIPSHOT - This gives you a "snapshot" of the data you have just
           snipped.

           Type "SNIPSHOT" on the command line to see what you
           snipped.  You also have the ability to clear your
           profile at this time if you like.

GLUE     - This will paste the contents of the profile to wherever
           you have placed your cursor.

           Type "GLUE" and place your cursor where you want the
           data in the profile to appear.  This could overlay the
           data which is already there.  You can use the (B)efore
           and (A)fter commands to insert lines before or after
           the line the cursor is on.

           The GLUE command will remove the data from the
           profile.  You can type "GLUE KEEP" to keep the data in
           the profile after the GLUE command has been completed.

PICK     - Like the SNIP command, except it cuts out the data
           the cursor is on, delimited by spaces.  Only need to
           execute the PICK command once to cut out the data.

STAG     - Short for STAGGER.  Lets you GLUE one line at a time
           out of the profile.

           The line is removed after it is GLUEd.

SUM      - If you have placed numbers in your profile through
           the SNIP or PICK commands, you can sum these numbers
           without having to use a calculator.

ERASPROF - Erases the contents of the profile.

There are explanations in the comments of the programs themselves
which give options for using the commands

