* msg index TSA000 - TSA100 TSSINI TSSUT TBMSCR TBMCMD
*           TSA100 - TSA200 T5xICOMP
*           TSA200 - TSA210 T5xADD
*           TSA211 - TSA215 T5xbkup
*           TSA216 - TSA220 T5xFLOC
*           TSA221 - TSA230 T5xGCMD
*           TSA231 - TSA235 T5xGDAT
*           TSA236 - TSA240 T5xGDEL
*           TSA241 - TSA250 T5xGREP
*           TSA251 - TSA255 T5xINS
*                           T5xJCARD
*                           T5xLSTO
*                           T5xPMENU
*                           T5xPWHO
*                           T5xRCON
*                           T5xREPL
*                           T5xTSSIM
*                           T5xUNDEL
*           tsa501 - tsa505 Authrun
*           tsa506 - tsa599 various
*
*

  TSA001I: SPI sample TSSINI used
  Issuing routine: TSSINI

  Explanation: The %TSSUT command was invoked with the parameter
               SAMPLE which causes the T$$SAMP routine to be invoked
               instead of the default T$$xxxx routine.

  TSA002I: UNABLE TO FIND AUTHORITY DATASET:  dsname
           SENSE CODE:  xxxxxxxx
  Issuing routine: TSSINI

  Explanation: The SCALIST dataset which contains the authorized
               user list was unavailable. TSSINI continues with all
               IDS having maximum panel system authority.


  TSA003E: ERROR CALLING LOCAL T$$xxxx .TSSINI LINE =  ###
  Issuing routine: TSSINI

  Explanation: After determining the SYSID of the current system,
              TSSINI attempted to call the REXX exec T$$xxxx
              ( where xxxx is your SYSID). The call resulted in a
              non zero return code.

  Action:      Correct your T$$xxxx routine so it always sets a return
               code of zero, or if you do not wish the T$$xxxx exec
               invoked change the CUSTOM_CALL variable in TSSINI to
               "NO".

  TSA004E: ERROR IN VARIABLE INIT. CHECK TSSINI LINE =  ###
  Issuing routine: TSSINI

  Explanation: TSSINI encountered an error in the specified line.

  Action: Review and correct the TSSINI REXX exec


  TSA005E: RECOVERY ERROR. TSSINI TERMINATING LINE =   ###
  Issuing routine: TSSINI

  Explanation: TSSINI encountered a fatal error in the specified line.
               TSSINI immediately terminated without setting the
               required variables. This error is probably non
               recoverable.

  Action: Review and correct the TSSINI REXX exec

  TSA006I: Invalid option, or security failure for option  opt
  Issuing routine: TSSINI

  Explanation: TSSINI did not recognize the option specified, because
               it is not a valid option, not an authorized option,
               or is incorrectly spelled.

  Action: If option seems to be entered correctly check your authority
          and panel tables for improper data.

  TSA026W: VGET FOR  VARIABLE   vname   FAILED IN TSSUT
           VARIABLE VARLIST MAY BE IMPROPERLY SET.
  Issuing routine: TSSINI

  Explanation: TSSINI encountered an error when attempting to VGET
               the mentioned variable from the profile pool. This
               VGET is attempted because the mentioned variable is
               included in the VARLIST variable. Processing continues
               with the mentioned variable in an uninitialized state.

  Action: Ensure that the variable specified is being VPUT into the
          profile pool in the T$$xxxx exec, or remove the value from
          VARLIST variable and reinitialize the system to clear this
          error.

  TSA027W: Too many authorization codes provided. aborting

  Issuing routine: TSSINI

  Explanation: TSSINI encountered more than 20 authorization codes
               in the AUTHCODE variable. Only the first 20 codes
               will be processed.

  Action: Ensure that the authcode variable has a maximum of 20
          codes.

  TSA028I: Trial code found for processor: #####

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: TSSUT found a trial authorization code and is using
               that code.

  Action: If you have a permanent code for this processor insure
          it is prior to any trial codes, since the authority
          routine stops checking upon finding a valid trial code.

  TSA029I: Authorization valid until #####

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: TSSUT found an authorization code and is using
               that code.

  Action: None.

  TSA030I: Function completed successfully

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: TSSUT invoked a command that has completed and NOT
               set a completion message. This occurs when a command
               is defined with the MSGOPT of 0 in the SRCCMD
               definition member, or any dynamic command is invoked
               in batch mode.

  Action: No action is required, if your command is setting a message
          and it is not displayed at completion, check the MSGOPT of
          the command definition in the SRCCMD member.

  TSA031I: function completed with a return code of xx

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: TSSUT invoked a command that has completed and NOT
               set a completion message.  The command set a non
               zero return code which is displayed in the message.
               This occurs when a command is defined with the
               MSGOPT of 0 in the SRCCMD definition member, or
               any dynamic command is invoked in batch mode.

  Action: No action is required, if your command is setting a message
          and it is not displayed at completion, check the MSGOPT of
          the command definition in the SRCCMD member.

  TSA032E: load dataset not usable, load aborted. acid

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: A SCREENLOAD or COMMANDLOAD command was issued
               however the ACID field did not contain a dataset
               that was available.

  Action: Confirm that the ACID field contains a valid dataset name,
          and that you have access to it.

  TSA033E: table format not dynamic, screenload not valid

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: A SCREENLOAD command was issued, however the current
               configuration does not use the screen table as input.

  Action: Confirm that the panel you are using is named SPIUTIL,
          any other name will prevent the screen table from being
          used. Confirm that the PANEL variable in TSSINI is set
          correctly and not being inadvertently overwritten in
          the T$$xxxx routine. Confirm that TABLEOPT is set
          to TEMP.

  TSA034I: All internal output will now be shown.

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: A TRAPOFF command was issued and all generated
               messages will be show to the user.

  Action: None, a TRAPOFF command will reverse this effect.

  TSA035I: I am now trapping subtask created messages

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: A TRAPON command was issued and all generated
               messages will be trapped.

  Action: None, a TRAPON command will reverse this effect.

  TSA036I: Failed. requires authority level xx yours is xx

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: A command was called for which the user had inadequate
               authority.

  Action: Confirm user and command authority are correctly defined
          in the SRCCMD and SCALIST variables in TSSINI.

  TSA037E: Aborted. Log is unavailable yet function requires log

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: A command was called which required the log to be
               available, the log is not available so the command
               is terminated.

  Action: Make log available, change command definition or change
          the global setting of LOGFAIL in TSSINI.

  TSA038E: a xxxxxx field is required for this function

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: A command was called which has data requirements
               which were not met as specified in the message text.
               The command was not executed due to lack of data,
               or the data was not the type required.

  Action: Provided the data needed or change the command definition
          to reflect updated data requirements in SRCCMD member.

  TSA039I: Panel system standard initialization complete

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The panel system has completed its initial setup and
               is ready to accept commands. A full reinitialization
               of all variables was NOT done.

  Action: None. If you require all variables to be updated issue the
          REINIT command.

  TSA040I: Primary initialization successful. Variables set

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The panel system has completed it initial setup and
               is ready to accept commands. A full reinitialization
               was done.

  Action: None.

  TSA041E: mode change failed during jobcard build.

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: While calling the TxxJCARD routine during a mode change
               that routine returned a code of 16 indicating a failure.
               The mode was not changed.

  Action: Confirm that the DS6 and MSCA variables are contained
          in your profile pool. ALso confirm that the dataset name
          in DS6 is accessable to the jobcard routine.

  TSA042I: mode change complete. jcl will be in xxxxxxx

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The mode was changed to batch successfully. Any resulting
               JCL will be contained in the dataset mentioned.


  Action: If the dataset is incorrect check your DS5 variable and
          update as needed.

  TSA043I: mode change complete. JCL not submitted, is in xxxxx

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The mode was changed to online successfully. Any
               resulting JCL will be contained in the dataset
               mentioned. The JCL has NOT been submitted.

  Action: If the dataset is incorrect check your DS5 variable and
          update as needed.

  TSA044I: mode change complete. Batch stream submitted from xxxxx

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The mode was changed to online successfully. Any
               resulting JCL is be contained in the dataset
               mentioned. The JCL was submitted.

  Action: If the dataset is incorrect check your DS5 variable and
          update as needed.

  TSA045E: Invoked function returned a code of  xx

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: TSSUT invoked a command that has completed and NOT
               set a completion message.  The command did however
               set a nonzero return code which is mentioned in
               the error message.

  Action: No action is required, if your command is setting a message
          and it is not displayed at completion, check the MSGOPT of
          the command definition in the SRCCMD member.


  TSA046I: ### lines of debug file info written to xxxx

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The WRITEDEBUG command has written the debug log to
               the dataset specified.

  Action: No action is required, the log will remain in the specified
          dataset until overwritten by another function.

  TSA047E: Line ### returned a return code of ###

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The standard error routine of TSSUT was unexpectedly
               invoked. The line causing the error as well as the
               return code are mentioned in the message.

  Action: This is a very unusual error and usually indicates that
          improper changes have been made to the TSSUT exec. More
          information may be found in the debug log.

  TSA048E: Possible environmental error. check tver setting

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The standard error routine of TSSUT was unexpectedly
               invoked with a return code of -3.

  Action: This error usually indicates that a routine was called and
          did not exist. This usually means the command definition
          is incorrect in the SRCCMD member, the TVER variable is
          corrupted or the routine does not exist. Check variable
          status and command existance.

  TSA049E: Warning! TSSINI has failed. variables may be corrupted

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: After returning from the TSSINI exec the variable
               PANEL was not set. This could indicate a fatal
               error condition.

  Action: Confirm that TSSINI is functioning correctly and setting
          the required vcariables prior to exit.

  TSA050I: REXX input interpreted successfully

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The command REXXCMD was successfully completed.

  Action: NONE.

  TSA051W: REXXCMD invalid, input ignored

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The command REXXCMD was issued but was ignored
               due to the contents of a soureline instruction.

  Action: Remove the sourceline statement from the command.

  TSA052I: Mode unchanged, remains online

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The command ONLINE was issued but the current mode is
               already online, so this command is ignored.

  Action: None.

  TSA053E: Table/screen mismatch, SPIMAIN displayed

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The TSSUT routine was unable to display the panel
               SPIUTIL because the screen table was not loaded. The
               mode was changed to basic and processing continues.

  Action: This is a mismatch between the scrload variable and the
          panel variable. Insure the scrload variable is set correctly
          and that the panel value is not being changed in your
          T$$ exec.

  TSA054I: Trapnum reset to value specified

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The TRAPSET command was issued and has completed
               successfully.

  Action: None.

  TSA101D: routine  xxxxxxxxxxxxx

  Issuing routine: First word in message

  Explanation: This message is a standard debug message for the
               system. The text is informational and written
               to the debug log. This message is sometimes useful to
               troubleshoot a failure in the SPI system.

  Action: None.

  TSA102E: Unique ACID xxx not supported. Function aborted

  Issuing routine: TxxICOMP

  Explanation: The TXxICOMP routine was asked to process an
               unsupported ACID type.

  Action: Correct ACID.

  TSA103I: xxxxxxxx  xxxxxxxx

  Issuing routine: TxxICOMP

  Explanation: The TXxICOMP routine LISTDUP function report has
               produced a standard report.

  Action: None.

  TSA104E: makeacid routine aborting due to lack of user type
             acid =  name
  Issuing routine: TxxICOMP

  Explanation: The TxxICOMP routine MAKEACID routine has encountered
               a logic error during ACID type processing.

  Action: Insure ACID is valid if in bypass mode. If you require
          support have the text input available as well as the debug
          log produced.

  TSA105E: TSS list command failed for ACID xxxxxxxx

  Issuing routine: TxxICOMP

  Explanation: The TxxICOMP list logic was unable to list one of the
               ACIDs specified.

  Action: Insure all ACIDs passed are valid and under your TSS
          authority. Be aware the exec is listing the ACIDs with
          the ALL,EXPIRE keywords.

  TSA106E: Unable to retrieve data to support bypass mode

  Issuing routine: TxxICOMP

  Explanation: The TxxICOMP was invoked with the parm BYPASS but was
               unable to open the DSN that should have contained the
               input data.

  Action: Confirm that the dataset specified in variable DS1 is valid
          and available. More information may be available in the
          debug log, which can be viewed with the WRITEDEBUG command.

  TSA107I: Translation complete, no other routine invoked

  Issuing routine: TxxICOMP

  Explanation: The TxxICOMP has completed the translation of the
               specified IDs. No other task is done because no valid
               function parm was passed, or the caller requested only
               that translation be done.

  Action: Check the spelling of the function parameter in the command
          stream to confirm the routine was invoked properly. If the
          caller requested only translation then this is not an error.

  TSA108E: TSS command failed, check resource type, name and authority

  Issuing routine: TxxICOMP

  Explanation: TxxICOMP encountered an  error when issuing a TSS
               WHOHAS command.

  Action: Confirm that the resource type and resource name are correct
          and that you have all required TSS authority. Check the
          debug log, which can be viewed with the WRITEDEBUG command.

  TSA109I: Complete. Output stream written to  dsname

  Issuing routine: TxxICOMP

  Explanation: TxxICOMP has finished processing the request and the
               output was written to the dsname mentioned.

  Action: None.

  TSA200E: function aborted. acid not added.

  Issuing routine: T5xADD

  Explanation: The T5xADD exec was exited prior to completion.

  Action: Check the debug log for more information.

  TSA201E: Errors encountered. check ACID status

  Issuing routine: T5xADD

  Explanation: One or more of the commands issued during ACID creation
          returned a non zero return code.

  Action: Check the debug log for more information.

  TSA202E: ACID added. no errors encountered.

  Issuing routine: T5xADD

  Explanation: The add routine has completed normally.

  Action: None.

  TSA211E: BACKUP DATASET IS UNAVAILABLE STATUS =  status

  Issuing routine: T5xBKUP

  Explanation: The T5xBKUP exec was unable to open the backup DSN.

  Action: Confirm that the dataset specified in variable DSBACK
          is valid and available. More information may be available
          in the debug log, which can be viewed with the WRITEDEBUG
          command.

  TSA221E: FAILED. STREAM IS INCOMPLETE, FAILURE IN LISTING GROUP

  Issuing routine: T5xGCMD

  Explanation: The T5xGCMD exec was unable to list the ACID specified.

  Action: Confirm that the ACID exists and that you have the
          required authority.

  TSA222E: I HAVE RECEIVED NO INPUT FROM T5xPWHO

  Issuing routine: T5xGCMD

  Explanation: The T5xGCMD exec was unable to list the ACID specified.

  Action: Confirm that the ACID exists and that you have the
          required authority.

  TSA223I: GROUP COMMMAND STREAM PLACED IN DSN  xxx

  Issuing routine: T5xGCMD

  Explanation: The T5xGCMD exec has completed successfully and the
               generated output is in the dataset specified.

  Action: None.

  TSA236E: Failed. global delete cannot be run in online mode

  Issuing routine: T5xGDEL

  Explanation: The T5xGDEL exec has been invoked in ONLINE mode,
               but that exec must be invoked in BATCH mode.
               Since it generates a batch job that may need to be
               run more than once.

  Action: Change the mode and reinvoke the command.

  TSA237I: function completed. output appended to batch file

  Issuing routine: T5xGDEL

  Explanation: The T5xGDEL exec has been invoked and completed,
               with output appended to you standard batch JCL file.

  Action: None.

  TSA241W: Warning - cannot replace an ACID with itself

  Issuing routine: T5xGREP

  Explanation: An attempt was made to replace a profile with itself.
               The JCL will still be generated but will be invalid.

  Action: Remove the target profile from the replacing string.

  TSA242W: Warning - profile was unlistable JCL may not be valid

  Issuing routine: T5xGREP

  Explanation: A profile was passed to the replace exec was unlistable.
               The JCL will still be generated but will be invalid.

  Action: Remove the invalid profile from the replacing string.

  TSA243E: Aborted - profile was unlistable. Check validity

  Issuing routine: T5xGREP

  Explanation: The target profile passed to the replace exec was
               unlistable.  The function cannot continue.

  Action: Insure you have the required authority, and that the ACID
          Is valid.

  TSA244I: Replace stream generated output in  xxx

  Issuing routine: T5xGREP

  Explanation: The replace exec was called in ONLINE mode and has
               completed with output routed to the mentioned DSN.

  Action: None. The replace exec always generates a JCL stream, the
          mode setting merely changes where the output is stored.

  TSA245I: Replace stream appended to batchfile.

  Issuing routine: T5xGREP

  Explanation: The replace exec was called in BATCH mode and has
               completed with output routed to the batch JCL file.

  Action: None. The replace exec always generates a JCL stream, the
          mode setting merely changes where the output is stored.

  TSA246E: Unable to find attached ACIDs for replace stream

  Issuing routine: T5xGREP

  Explanation: The replace found no ACIDs attached to the specified
               profile. The function cannot continue.

  Action: Insure the ACID specified is a profile and has ACIDs
          connected to it.

  TSA251E: Failed. Insert function only supports 5 profile at a time

  Issuing routine: T5xINS

  Explanation: The insert function was called with more than 5
               profiles to be inserted.

  Action: Specify only 5 profile for insertion.

  TSA252E: Function aborted. xxxxx is not an owned profile

  Issuing routine: T5xINS

  Explanation: The insert function was called with an invalid
               profile to be inserted.

  Action: Confirm that the profile exists and you have authority
          over it.

  TSA253E: Failed. Delete requested but xxxx not removed from ACID xxxx

  Issuing routine: T5xINS

  Explanation: The insert function was called to remove a profile
               from the specified ACID, but the remove command
               failed.

  Action: Confirm that the profile is attached to the ACID, and you
          have authority to remove it. The debug log should contain
          a detailed message from the security package to indicate
          what the error was.

  TSA254I: xxxxx inserted in xxxx  at position xxxx

  Issuing routine: T5xINS

  Explanation: The insert function was called to insert a profile
               and has completed successfully.

  Action: None.

  TSA501E: DSN xxxx is unavailable, status = xxxxx

  Issuing routine: AUTHRUN

  Explanation: The Authrun routine is unable to execute because the
               dataset mentioned in the message is unavailable. The
               specific dataset status is in the message.

  Action: Make sure the dataset passed to authrun in the invocation is
          valid.

  TSA502I: Authrun xxxxx substitution string found in stream

  Issuing routine: AUTHRUN

  Explanation: The Authrun routine has found a $$ string in the
               command stream and is replacing it with a new value.

  Action: None.

  TSA503I: Authrun resolved command is xxxxx

  Issuing routine: AUTHRUN

  Explanation: The Authrun routine has finished command resolution
               and the result is shown.

  Action: None.

  TSA504I: Authrun issuing command

  Issuing routine: AUTHRUN

  Explanation: The Authrun is issuing the resolved command mentioned
               in the TSA503I message.

  Action: None.

  TSA505I: Sum of all return codes is xx

  Issuing routine: AUTHRUN

  Explanation: The Authrun is has issued all commands in the stream
               and the combined return code is specified.

  Action: If the code is not zero you should determine which command
          had the non zero code and research that command.

  TSA506W: BPXWIRAC returned negative return code of

  Issuing routine: various

  Explanation: The BPXWIRAC exec was called and set a negative
               return code. This exec should return a code which
               indicates the highest UID currently in use for an
               ACID defined to the security package.

  Action: Map the code to the action below:


         -3  The routine was not found, confirm BPXWIRAC is in
             your SYSEXEC or SYSPROC concatenation.

  TSA507E: HIGHUID omvstabs modify failed.. unable to determine
           next uid. HIGHUID terminating

  Issuing routine: HIGHUID

  Explanation: During HIGHUID processing a TSS MODIFY OMVSTABS
               was issued and returned a non zero return code.

  Action: This is probably due to a lack of TSS authority, if
          so any preceding TSS messages should be reviewed.

  TSA508E: Fatal error, no group specified and vget for defgroup failed

  Issuing routine: GIVEUID

  Explanation: The GIVEUID exec was unable to determine the default
               group and terminated processing.

  Action: Invoke the GIVEUID exec with a valid group or set the
          DEFGROUP variable in your profile pool.

  TSA509E: Command not processed. check commands validity

  Issuing routine: T5xCMDO

  Explanation: The command passed to T5xCMDO finished with a non zero
               return code.

  Action: Insure the command is valid and reissue T5xCMDO.

  TSA510E: xxxxxxx has ended abnormally

  Issuing routine: various

  Explanation: The invoked command mentioned in the error message ended
               abnormally.

  Action: Check the debug log for more detailed information. This
          message usually indicates that the exec encountered an
          error during initialization.

  TSA511I: Batch file updated with delete stream for acid

  Issuing routine: T5xDEL

  Explanation: The delete command appended the created output stream
               to the current batch file.

  Action: None.

  TSA512E: Provided dataset invalid xxx

  Issuing routine: GETBACKU

  Explanation: The dataset specified is not accessable

  Action: Confirm DSN availability and your authority

  TSA513I: Backup data restored, resides in

  Issuing routine: GETBACKU

  Explanation: The copy was completed

  Action: None

  TSA514I: Command issued output resides in: xxx

  Issuing routine: T5xCMDO

  Explanation: The command passed to T5xCMDO finished and the output
               resides in the mentioned dataset

  Action: None

  TSA515W: Unsupported function completed. Output in xxxxx

  Issuing routine: T5xCON

  Explanation: You have invoked the unsupported version of the convert
               routine and it has completed nornally.

  Action: If you were specifically invoking the old routine this
          message is normal. If you were trying to invoke the current
          version you should check the CORECMD member of the delivered
          parmlib and copy the convert command entry to your SRCCMD
          member and reinvoke SPI .

  TSA516E: Expert function is unavailable in basic mode.

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: An attempt was made to call an expert level function
               from a basic mode panel which is invalid.

  Action: Invoke the equivalent basic mode function or change the
          expert level function so that it does not pass any of the
          variables ACID DATA or DATA2. Since the basic mode panels
          have no way to retrieve these variables.

  TSA517I: Popup panel aborted, function stopped.

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The popup panel set a non zero return code, so the
               selected function did not continue.

  Action: Input the required data on the popup panel and hit enter,
          do not hit PF3 or otherwise exit the panel prematurely.

  TSA518I: Mode changed due to user request.

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: The panel display mode was changed to expert or basic
               because of a specific user command.

  Action: None.

  TSA519W: xxxxxxxx

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: This message occurs when the MSGOPT of a command in
               the SRCCMD is set to DATA, and the user is in basic
               presentation mode. The DATA parm is used in expert mode
               to return data in the ACID panel field, since there is
               no ACID field in basic mode the additional data will
               overlay the normal message area. This in effect
               prevents this routine from setting a message that the
               user will ever see.

  Action: The debug log will contain the original message the routine
          set prior to the overlay.

  TSA520D: Overlaying xxxxx SECRC= xxx

  Issuing routine: TSSUT

  Explanation: This message documents the overlay that occurs as a
               result of msg TSA519W. See that msg for more details.


  Action: None.

  TSA521I: Permit function successful for id  acid

  Issuing routine: T5xPER

  Explanation: A permit command was issued from T5xPER and returned a
               condition code of 0.

  Action: None.

  TSA522I: Permit function returned a non zero return code of xxx

  Issuing routine: T5xper

  Explanation: A permit command was issued from T5xPER and returned a
               non zero return code as specified in the message text.

  Action: Review the debug log using WRITEDEBUG and see why the command
          failed.

  TSA523I: Sample authority stream created output is in xxxxx

  Issuing routine: T5xicomp

  Explanation: A makeauth command was issued and the output resides
               in the mentioned dataset.

  Action: Customize the output and place it in your authority stream
          dataset.
