                   FREE TAPE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

    This is the Free Tape Management System (FTMS, pseudonym ITMS)
which has been submitted semi-anonymously.  Please direct inquiries
to Sam Golob  908-901-0943 or 718-403-8666.  If these numbers become
incorrect, please call the NaSPA office 414-423-2420, membership
officer, to find out what my current address is.  I am not the author
of this system, but I will be glad to direct you to him for advice
and/or support.

    This is a complete Tape Management System which can keep track
of a tape library of any size.  As written, it will not kick down
a wrong tape, but it will tell you everything that has happened in
your tape library.  All tape activity is logged.

    This system keeps full track of all the tapes in your library,
and you have a sizable collection of reports to tell you what tapes
are soon to reach "scratch status", etc.  See member ITMSFUNC to
look at the number of reports and other functions which are available
with this system.

    Members of this PDS are as follows:

    ITMS000A  -  This is assembler source for the main program
                 which runs ITMS.

    ITMPAR01  -  This is assembler source for the ITMS parser.

    ITMDBDEF  -  This is JCL to define the control datasets that
                 are needed to run ITMS.

    ITMSFUNC  -  This member supplies sample execution parms
                 to execute the various functions which ITMS
                 is capable of providing.

    ITMS705I  -  This is an AOC clist to drive the ITMS system.
                 It gets kicked off by the IEC705I tape message,
                 through the ITMS705M message table entry in AOC.
                 If you have a different automated operations
                 package than IBM's AOC, this member can be
                 adapted to the other system.

    ITMS705M  -  This is an AOC/Netview message table entry to
                 drive the ITMS clist from the IEC705I console
                 message.  If you have a different automated
                 operations package than IBM's AOC, this member
                 can be adapted to the other system.

    ITMSRUN   -  The started proc that runs ITMS.  Kicked off
                 by the clist.

    ITMSJOB   -  (On File 224).  Sample printout of an ITMS run.


    To install, you do the following:

        A.  Assemble and linkedit the two modules, ITMS000A and
            ITMPAR01.  They should go into a linklist library.
            I don't think they have to be authorized.  Experiment.

        B.  Customize and run the ITMDBDEF job to create the
            datasets necessary to run ITMS.  Be sure to add
            enough room for growth, for your environment.
            The illustrated environment controls about 2000
            tapes.

        C.  Put the ITMSRUN member into your PROCLIB as ITMS.
            Customize as needed with your own dataset names.

        D.  Install the ITMS705M message table entry and the
            ITMS705I clist into the appropriate places so they
            get kicked off by AOC.  Examine the ITMS705I clist
            so you understand how it works.  If necessary,
            customize as appropriate for any other automations
            package that you have.  (If you get this to work
            on another automated operations package, please
            send the modified members to me, so I can include
            them in this file.)

    The sequence of events in executing this system is as follows:

        1.  The tape job produces an IEC705I mount message.

        2.  The Netview message table entry intercepts the IEC705I
            message and kicks off the ITMS705I clist, which starts
            the ITMS proc using appropriate parameters that were
            parsed from the IEC705I message.

        3.  The ITMS started task updates the ITMS database.
            See the sample report from File 224.

        4.  You run "any of many" executions of ITMS with
            appropriate parameters (see member ITMSFUNC) to
            produce all the reports you need and want.

    Good luck in setting this system up.  If this documentation is
inadequate, please call Sam Golob (information above), and I'll try
to fix it for the next people (and for you).

    For support, also call Sam Golob.

