   This User Guide describes all operations you need to compile
        Data Set list you will use late to allocate DS during
        migration.

  Full process consist of few steps.
  1. You must extract Data Set Names from your JCL library. If you
     have a set fo libraries, then you must repeat this extraction
     for every library and merge all extraction in one file.
  2. Cleaning the list. Certainly you will not interested in
     DISP=NEW Data Sets. Also you do not need system and some others
     Data Sets. So you must clean up all of these from your list.
  3. Determine DS types. MIGRATE macro works only with PDS/PDSE and
     PS (including EXTENDED and LARGE) Data Sets. GDGALLOC macro
     works with GDG only. The purpose of this step is prepare
     the list for splitting it to two list: one for PO-PS DS, and
     other for GDG.
  4. List splitting.
  5. Requesting of allocation parameters.

  To accumulate DSN list you must allocate PO Data Set with LRECL=133.
  All lines with '*' in first position will be treated as comment line.
  You may include spacial lines fro logging in format:
  ----+----1-
  * LOG
  * LOG
  '*' must be in first position.
  You may have as many LOG lines as you need.
  Last LOG line (active) will be marced 'LOGA'.
  All LOG lines will be filled by cycle.

  Step 1.
  At this step you scan your JCL library with Search-For Utility to
  find out all occurrences of 'DISP=' and 'DSN='.
  As SRCHFOR list is ready, run EXTRDISP. You have now DSN list with
  its disposition. Use EDIT commands to discard '(' and ')' in
  disposition.
  If you have a set of JCL libraries, you must repeat 'Search-Extract'
  for every your library.
  Aggregate all results in one file usinf 'CUT-PASTE' EDIT commands.

  Step 2.
  Delete from result list all DSN you do not need.
  For example:
  x NEW 48 50 all;del x all
  will delete all DSN with DISP=NEW. Pay attention that you may have
  blank disposition for any DSN.
  You may also have in your list system DSN such as 'SYS1' or others.
  This is a good point to discart all of these.
  You also may have duplicate names in your list.
  Use SORT command with DELDUP macro to delete all duplicates.

  Step 3 and 4.
  Now you must determine the type of all you DSNs.
  Run QDS macro against the list. This macro inserts DS type next to
  disposition. You may use now
  x all;f nonvsam 52 60 all;del x all
  to build list of all non-VSAM Data Sets, or
  x all;f 'gdg base' 52 60 all;del x all
  to build list of all GDG.
  COPY the list recieved into separate member.
  Do not mix NONVSAM and GDG BASE in one member.

  Step 5.
  Open member with your non-VSAM Data Sets and run MIGRATE macro.
  This macro fills allocation paramerets for every DSN in the list
  next to the DS type.
  For member with GDG names run GDGALLOC macro.

  Now you have list of all DS with its allocation parameters.
  You may send this list to other system or use it to reallocate
  your DS in case of crush.

