
 Jobs used to create the CBT Tape are named NEWTvvvn, where vvv is the
 tape version.  Each job writes a maximum of 100 files on the tape,
 because of the limit on TIOT size, limiting the number of DD entries
 that can be coded in one job.  Sometimes the last job will contain
 a few more than 100 jobs, but when it gets too big, a new job will
 be created according to the last "100 file boundary".

 Load modules needed for File 008 can be found in the LOADLIB member
 here, or on CBT Tape File 035.

 It is assumed that volumes, V500MT (SL)
                             C500MU (SL)
                             CBT500 (NL)  are properly initted tapes.

 The tape created is assumed (at present) to be a very long 3490,
  and it is in the P390 AWS format.  To convert to an actual tape,
  use the VTT2TAPE program from CBT File 533.  The AWS-format tape
  can be downloaded from www.cbttape.org.

 The real length of the tape would only actually fit on a 3590.

 If anyone still needs a real tape, please let me know.  We also
 have a 3390-3 disk which has all the CBT files.  There is a
 DFDSS backup of it (tersed) and an FDR backup of it (tersed) on
 the www.cbttape.org web site.

 Due to the fact that I sometimes put folded zip files, PDF files,
 and Microsoft Word files on the CBT file pds'es, folded over FB-80,
 it is very possible that the string "><" will naturally occur in
 columns 1 and 2 of a file member.  In order to prevent those records
 from being changed to the string "./" by the PDSLOAD program during
 the reloading of this tape, and thereby corrupting the reload
 output, it is necessary to include the //SYSUPLOG DD NAME in the JCL
 to run the LISTPDS, OFFLOAD, and PDSLOAD programs.  The LISTPDS,
 OFFLOAD, and PDSLOAD programs have been modified to include an extra
 DDNAME of //SYSUPLOG, which is a pds that contains all records that
 REALLY SHOULD contain the string "><" in columns 1 and 2, if they
 ever occur (and they do).  The //SYSUPLOG file is contained as an
 IEBUPDTE sequentialized pds, on File 007 of the CBT Tape.  It is
 especially constructed at the time each version of the CBT Tape is
 made, and is tailored to each version cut of the CBT Tape.

 Please use the version of the SYSUPLOG file, which corresponds to
 the version of the tape you are unloading.

