  If you run LABELS macro at the first time, new table will be
  created in library you_user_id.LAID.TABLES. This table will have
  the same name as file you currently edit. All labels and comments
  for every label will be stored in this table.
  The table remains in virtual storage until you perform QUIT or
  CLOSE against it in any way. So if the table was not closed or
  ended, you will call it in any time by performing LABELS without
  parameters. In this case the table will be fetched from virtual
  storage.
  After QUIT or CLOSE is performed, you may read the table from
  library using RESTORE parameter or choosing it on panel
  'All Tables List' with 'S' line command.

  Note 1.
  If you like another name for tables library, correct DSTable
  variable within the macro.

  Next time you run LABELS macro you'll get panel 'All Tables List'
  (LAIDTL0) if the table is not opend yet, or 'All Labels List'
  (LAID000) if you already work with the table.

  In panel 'All Tables List' you may choose existen table (line
  command 'S') to apply labels from this table to your file. Or you
  may delete (line command 'D') the table. If you press PF03 key, no
  action will be performed.

  In panel 'All Labels List' you may fulfill the next:
    1. use 'L' line command to locate appropriate label in the file.
    2. use 'D' line command to delete line from the table and discard
       label from the file.
    3. use 'E' line command to edit comment. You may issue only one
       comment at a time.
    4. use 'QUIT' primary commant to delete the table from virtual
       storage. All changes will be discarded. You may perform this
       through 'Menu.2'. Table will not be saved.

    5. use 'CLOSE' primary command to save currently opened table and
       finish with it.
    6. if press PF03 no action will be performed.

  You may call macro LABELS with some parameters.
    1. RESTORE. You will mainly use this parameter at the beginning of
       edit session to restore all labels previously saved. If you
       like to restore labels during edit session after they were
       changed, issue LABELS QUIT before to end discard current table.
       Then type LABELS RESTORE to retrieve labels.
       If new label exist in the file, it will be overriden by
       label from the table. If new label has no corresponding record
       in the table, it remains as is.
    2. QUIT. Use this parameter to finish with current table without
       saving. This parameter makes the same as Menu.2 in panel
       'All Labels List' (LAID000).
    3. CLOSE. Use this parameter if you like to save current table
       in you tables library. It is equivalent of Menu.1 in panel
       'All Labels List' (LAID000).
    4. DELETE. This parameter will delete current table from your
       tables library. It performs the same as line command 'D' in
       panel 'All Tables List' (LAIDTL0).
  If you call LABELS without parameters, it checks your tables
    library. If table exist, you will see 'All Tables List' (LAIDTL0)
    panel. As you will choose 'S', then merge occurs. If the macro
    finds new label in the same line, then this label will accept
    comment of old label from table. All lines without labels will be
    labeled according records in the table. If new label exist in
    any line and there is no corresponding record in the table, then
    this label remains as is.

