Subject:  Algol F Level 2.1 ICR
From:     <thomasjarmst@optusnet.com.au>
Date:     9/3/2012 9:56 PM
To:       opplr@hotmail.com, sbgolob@cbttape.org

Dear Phil and Sam,

I am reluctant to establish my own website to host the updated IBM
Algol F Compiler and Library as I would prefer not to see various
Hercules oriented MVS 3.8 software updates fragmented across
different websites.  To that end I have contributed my previous MVS
3.8 system updates to Greg Price and he has generously hosted them
for me.  Greg's excellent site has now become recognized as being
the home for many MVS 3.8 modifications.  My next contribution,
when completed, being improvements to GTF SVC tracing, GTRACE data
and AMDPRDMP trace formatting will be contributed to Greg for
hosting as Greg has already has made enhancements to GTF/AMDPRDMP
and my enhancements build on top of his previous work in these
component areas.

Initially I considered Jay Moseley's website would be an appropriate
site to host the updated IBM Algol F Compiler and Library as his
site seems to be the recognized site for MVS 3.8 language
processors.  I decided to postpone sending my materials to him.

I would therefore like to contribute the updated Algol Compiler
and Library to a site for hosting so I would be grateful if you,
Sam, would host the updates on CBTTAPE.

There are three deliverables as part of the Algol update which I
have termed an Independent Component Release for MVS.

Firstly a HET format tape containing the updated Compiler modules,
Library modules, PROCLIB members, IVP SAMPLIB members and an
example zap to change relevant Compiler options for the MVS
environment.  A PDF of a General Information Manual is also
provided that describes the small programming improvements to the
Compiler and Library, the installation process, running the IVP
jobs and sample output from the IVP jobs together with
instructions on how to change the default Compiler options. The
ICR GIM does not describe the many internal changes made to the
Compiler and Library as described in my email to Phil as most
users would not be interested in the significant internal
reformatting of the assembler source code.  Except for the missing
source code in module IEX50, recovered by disassembly, it is
reasonable to say that the source code is now in better condition
for the MVS environment than when it left the IBM Nordic labs.
(Tape image was converted to AWS from HET for non-Hercules users. SBG)
Member in this pds:   ALGOLF21

The second deliverable is a HET format tape containing the assembler
source and macro libraries needed to build and link edit the updated
Algol Compiler and Library.
(Tape image was converted to AWS from HET for non-Hercules users. SBG)
Member in this pds:   ALG21SRC

The third deliverable is a modern replacement for the optional IBM
microfiche listings of the source code assemblies of the Algol
Compiler and Library. The assembly listings match the updated load
modules.

Phil raised with me a matter regarding missing modules. The
CBTTAPE distribution of the original IBM version of the Compiler
and Library is not missing any modules. However the Jay Moseley
distribution is missing the dynamically loaded Algol Library
error handling module IHIERR and its alias of IHIERROR. An Algol
Program runtime error, using the Jay Moseley distribution, will
fail with an S806 attempting to LOAD IHIERR instead of an Algol
runtime error message and dump. As there is only one dynamically
loaded runtime module for Algol I decided to simplify the
distribution and make IHIERR/IHIERROR a resident runtime module
resolved at LINK EDIT time to avoid any future issues. This
change adds an additional 5K to the size of an Algol program load
module which is insignificant in the MVS context.

I have not shipped the updated Algol Compiler and Library to
anyone other than Phil so I would appreciate it if both of you
could install the ICR in your systems and provide me with any
feedback that would improve the proposed distributed materials.
The current method of packaging was designed to be compatible
with Jay Moseley's site and is not compatible with the usual
CBTTAPE method of packaging. I would welcome any suggestions you
make Sam on the best way to package for your site.

(I have repackaged everything.  Please see member @FILE876. SBG)

I have attached a zip of the ICR GIM and load module HET tape to
this email and will send the other two deliverables in separate
emails.

Regards
Tom Armstrong
<thomasjarmst@optusnet.com.au>

