Subject:  Easier Disasembly of IKJTABLS with free tools
From:     Sam Golob <IBMUSER@cbttape.org>
Date:     4/21/2013 10:30 AM

   This refers to member FILE234I in this pds, which is a
   self-contained package to create a disassembly of the IKJTABLS
   load module using only free tools.

   Here is a pds which will help you disassemble IKJTABLS with
   free tools, and which will greatly assist you in making an
   assembly job for your own load module IKJTABLS.  The File 234
   disassembler is already installed in the XMIT-ed load library
   that is member LOADLIB in the FILE234I pds.  See the member
   $$$$READ in the FILE234I pds, for detailed instructions.

   Once everything is set up, you will only have to run one job,
   called DISAJC01, to create the assembly JCL.  The output of
   this job is four disassembled source members of a pds, the
   OUTPUTS pds, with assembly JCL at the top (included as OUTPUTS
   pds member ASM) and linkedit JCL at the bottom (as OUTPUTS pds
   member LINK).  Just put all 6 members together in order, and
   you have the job to assemble and link your own IKJTABLS.  In
   my example installation, I called the combined JCL as member
   WHOLEJOB.  You, of course, will create your own combined JCL
   member in the OUTPUTS pds.

   I hope that this will help you set up any reassemblies for
   IKJTABLS that you will need in the future.

   There was one problem that I had.  The disassembly of table
   IKJEFTNS did not show the X'FFFF' that marks the end of that
   table.  Practically speaking, this will not cause a problem,
   because the table is already delimited by more than one blank
   entries, and you don't really need the X'FFFF' to delimit that
   table, unless all the other entries were already filled and
   none of them were blank.  A blank entry will always delimit
   any one of these tables.

   You can always write in a DC  X'FFFF' line at the end of the
   IKJEFTNS assembly, by hand.

   Please let me know how this method worked for you.

   All the best of everything to you and your family.

Sincerely,   Sam

