Subject:  Re: RAKF Status
From:     "Winkelmann Juergen" <winkelmann@id.ethz.ch>
Date:     Thu, 14 Apr 2011 20:09:51 +0000
To:       "Phil Roberts" <opplr@hotmail.com>,
          <svetter@ameritech.net>
CC:       <n9gtm@comcast.net>,
          <vbandke@bsp-gmbh.com>,
          "Sam Golob" <sbgolob@cbttape.org>

Hi Phil, all,

I've attached my final distribution tape to this mail. Although
there are of course still details that could be enhanced I think
that we can distribute these later through modifications given
that we now have a maintainable SMP distribution (an example for
such a modification could then be the implementation of RAKFPWUP
to allow end users to permanently change their passwords). If we
continue to change small details of the distribution like during
the past two weeks, I fear we'll never get it out

I've added Sam to the CC of this mail to keep him informed, as
he's already prepared a beautiful distribution for CBT from one
of the earlier tapes I sent out and I think this one he could now
finally publish if no objections come up. (BTW, Sam, the
VTT2TAPE source you mailed me yesterday assembles and runs
without problems on 3.8j so this is definitely the way to go for
people wanting to create their own tape; if you like I'm sending
you the loadlib back using XMIT370)

This distribution includes the following changes:

-      Documentation change mentioning that SMP level higher than
       04.44 (desirable is 04.48 as in TK 3) is needed. I think
       that's sufficient to point people to problems they might
       have with backlevel SMPs as encountered by Scott (I don't
       have final feedback from him by now but should it turn out
       not to disappear after he updated his SMP, than I'm going
       to fix it by providing an UCLIN workaround for people
       encountering it).

-      As mentioned yesterday, a full backout capability even if
       it had already been ACCEPTed. You'll find jobs and
       documentation for this in SAMPLIB. I placed a lot of
       warnings in there to hopefully prevent people from locking
       themselves out of their systems when trying to deinstall
       RAKF. Personally I'm still convinced that one should NEVER
       deinstall it after having it used for a while. An
       exception would of course be to deinstall it to be able to
       install another security system as Phil mentioned below.

I didn't consider your (Phil's) proposal to have RAKF (ICHSEC00)
simply put out a message if it is rerun when RAKF is already
active and do nothing. I think, if one issues  S RAKF" he expects
that it gets cleanly initialized, including profiles and users
table. From that perspective it's consequent to simply reload the
profiles and users tables if it is issued when RAKF is already
active. From my point of view the argument that this might
reverse a password change made by a user doesn't hold, as
password changes are anyway reversed outside the user's control
with every IPL as long as the above mentioned modification
supporting permanent password changes isn't implemented. So the
solution is here, to implement this feature, and not, to change
the behavior of ICHSEC00 (not that I'm too lazy to change it, it
would only need a single BC instruction to be modified  I really
think it's better to have it as it is now. (J)

Just let me know of any objections against publishing this
version now.  If you're fine, I'm going to put it in the RAKF
folder on H390-MVS and suggest that Sam goes forward to put it on
the CBT tape using packaging method he already proposed for the
previous distribution tape.

Cheers, Juergen
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Juergen Winkelmann             Tel.:   +41-44-632 5837
ETH Zuerich                    Fax.:   +41-44-632 1022
Informatikdienste              e-mail: winkelmann@id.ethz.ch
Clausiusstr. 59
CH-8092 Zuerich
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
