Subject: RXVSAM
Date: Mon, 25 Oct 1999 11:37:03 +1000
From: "Van Riel, Rob" <vanrielr@anz.com>
To: "'WingNotes@earthlink.net'" <WingNotes@earthlink.net>
CC: "'sbgolob@attglobal.net'" <sbgolob@attglobal.net>

Hi, Mark,

I've changed your RXVSAM REXX function, attached below, in three ways:

(1) To allow REWRITE to an ESDS (to accommodate George), I've
changed the code around label REWR020 more or less as you suggested.

(2) We experienced S906-04 abends when doing a large number of
writes because the load count for module IRXEXCOM exceeded 32767.
This is because the code LOADed IRXEXCOM but did not DELETE it.
I've changed the code to follow the chain
        R0 at entry --> REXX environment block --> REXX external entry
vector
thinking that this would be more efficient than repeatedly LOADing
and DELETE-ing IRXEXCOM.

(3) Similarly, the name/token service routines IEANTCR, IEANTRT and
IEANTDL were LOADed but not DELETEd. It's my impression that these
routines are little more than stubs for the underlying system
service, and therefore unlikely to change much from release to
release of the operating system.  Accordingly I've changed the LOADs
to CALLs (effectively), and resolved the references from SYS1.CSSLIB
at program bind.

Changed lines contain the identifier @ANZ in columns 68-71.

Let me take this opportunity to compliment you on your code. It's
nicely structured, which makes it very easy to change. I'm hoping
you can incorporate these changes, or something like them, for a
later CBT tape in your next incarnation as a sysprog. How's
composing going?

Regards, Rob

Rob van Riel
Software Installation & Support
1/227 Toorak Rd
South Yarra VIC 3141
* Tel   +61 3 9869 2657
> *        Fax  +61 3 9869 3447
* Email vanrielr@anz.com

-----Original Message-----
From: LynMark "mailto:WingNotes@earthlink.net"
Sent: Monday, October 04, 1999 12:59 PM
To: Levendakis, George
Subject: Re: RXVSAM Function

Dear George:

Looks like you caught me on that one.  It's a bug in the design.
There are two possible workarounds:

        1. try changing the code in RXVSAM near label REWR020 -
replace the test under mask and branch when zero instruction (TM . .
. BZ . . .) with just an unconditional branch to label REWR030.

        2. tell RXVSAM that the file is an RRDS rather than an ESDS
(at open), then read the records using the RBA as the "key", rewrite
the same way (supply RBA as the key) - you can try random (direct)
read and rewrite or read next and rewrite, according to your taste.
I believe you could even calculate the RBA of a record, since it
should be something like record number * length of record (or RBA of
previous record + record length if you're bumping thru the dataset).
Of course, they are all zero-relative numbers (i.e. RBA of record #1
will be 0000), so you may have to "adjust" the RBA.

Sorry about that, really.  I've tried to think of everything, but
obviously missed something.  I don't have access to a mainframe at
this time. I'm away from computer work now, following my other
career as a composer.  So I won't be back in the computer world
until mid-January.

Do let me know how that works, I'd be curious.  Since I have a
couple of other improvements I'd like to incorporate, I'll add your
request to my list.  Hopefully, I can do some rewriting next year
sometime.

Mark Winges
MuPro, Inc.
WingNotes@earthlink.net

At 12:11 PM 10/4/99 +1000, you wrote:

Mark,

I recently had the RXVSAM function installed on our system and have
started using it.

While browsing through the documentation, I noticed that error
message 0026E states that REWRITE is not allowed for an ESDS.  I had
intended to convert one of my PL/I programs which does a rewrite of
an ESDS and of course IMS/ESA has been doing rewrites of VSAM ESDS's
since VSAM was invented!

So I was wondering whether the message text is accurate, since the
only VSAM restriction to the REWRITE of an ESDS record is that the
LENGTH of the record MUST BE IDENTICAL to the length of the READ
record.

Can you please confirm that the RXVSAM function does not BLOCK the
ESDS rewrite and only returns the 0026E message if the user CHANGES
the record length between the READ and REWRITE requests!!

Thanks

George Levendakis

Database Services Group
ANZ Banking Group Ltd
Melbourne
Australia

Phone: +61 3 9869 2311
e-mail: levendag@anz.com



    ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Name: rxvsam.dat
   rxvsam.dat    Type: DAT File
                       (application/x-unknown-content-type-DAT_auto_file)
             Encoding: quoted-printable
