Subject:
        CBT Contribution
   Date:
        Sat, 10 Jul 1999 00:02:24 +1000
   From:
        "Paul Gillis" <pgillis@warrandyte.starway.net.au>
        "@RTS PG" <Paul.Gillis@colesmyer.com.au>
     To:
        "Sam Golob" <sbgolob@attglobal.net>

Sam,

Attached is a file containing a few of the utilities that I
developed and have used at many sites over the last twenty plus
years. The contents of the file are:-

1.) UNLOAD.ASM and UNLOAD.JCL. The unload assembler program
    provides the ability to convert a PDS into a flat file and
    to insert a control card of your own making in between each
    unloaded member, with the member name inserted at any
    position in the record.

2). DASD.SMP. This SMP/E usermod provides a DASD LSPACE
    program, that dumps all the data returned by the LSPACE
    macro into a file for further analysis.

3). DASDSPCE.SMP. This SMP/E usermod provides a DASD space
    command that will display the available space on a selected
    subset of the dasd farm.

4). DEBUG.MAC. This assembler macro I use to produce debug
    information from most programs that I write. The debug
    information is written to any number of possible output
    data sources.

5). GRS.SMP. This SMP/E usermod provides a WHOHAS type
    utility, and is normally used for that purpose.

6). SYSTEM.SMP. This SMP/E usermod contains a system IPL
    details program, which includes system symbols.

7). DISASM. Members DISASJCL, DISASMAC and DISASSRC
    contain an updated version of the disassembler
    found on file 171. The update supports all of the
    two byte 01 and B2 instructions. Support was not
    added for the A4, A5, A6, E4 and E5 opcodes, but could
    now be added reasonably easily.
    Instruction set based on SA22-7209-01 ESA/390 Reference
    Summary.

 -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -

I have a number of other pieces of code that I will add
to this collection, being:-

1). SAS utilities to manage the SMPPTS and the global
    GZONE entry.

2). SAS utility to convert the output from the DASD
    program into a SAS database.

3). An assembler ISPF environment that keeps tabs on your
    most managed datasets. Better than 3.4, not as good
    as Ezedit. Currently converting this to use the CSI.

Paul Gillis
Director P.C. Link Pty. Ltd. &
Pacific Systems Management Pty. Ltd.
Melbourne, Australia

