)F  ISPCMDU - Dynamic update of the ISPF command Table


Preface

Using program  ISPCMDU you can  add, replace or delete  entries in
the the in-storage command table  ISPCMDS, giving the the user the
following immediate benefits:

 -   The default IBM supplied command table(s) remains unchanged.
 -   Changes are active immediately.
 -   You  can  modify  the  command table  at  logon  time  and/or
     whenever you choose.


Background

The ISPF  command table is a  very convenient place to  store user
defined command shorthands for ISPF  or TSO commands. Many  people
would  customize the  ISPF command  table to  suit their  personal
preferences.  The  main drawback  is,  and  has always  been,  the
maintenance issue. If you start by  distributing a copy of the IBM
supplied command table  and let each user update his  or her local
copy, you have a major  problem distributing updates to the vendor
supplied part of the table.
 With  the later  releases of  Z/OS  you have  the possibility  of
having  multiple ISPF  command tables,  which goes  a long  way to
solve  this  problem,  but  it  requires an  update  to  the  ISPF
configuration.
 A  minor  nuisance is  that  each  update  requires the  user  to
restart the ISPF session. A lot  of effort has gone into trying to
solve  the first  problem, without  much success.  And the  second
problem has, until now, remained unsolved.
 ISPCMDU attepmpts  to solve  both issues. It  relies on  the fact
that the ISPF command table is just that - an ISPF table, although
with  a reserved  name and  specific purpose.  But as  it is  just
another table means that it can be treated as any other ISPF table
- it is open, in storage  and modifiable. And it is shared between
all the  sessions if you  are in  split- or multiple  screen mode.


Programs in the distribution

 -   ISPCMDU  update the command table from a datasset.
 -   ISPCMDL  lists the contents of open command tables.


Description of ISPCMDU

 Parameters

  DA(dsname member)       where to find input.
                          Dataset must be fully qualified, quotes
                          are ignored, it can be PARMLIB for
                          locating the  member in the parmlib
                          concatenation.
                          Default dsname is your ISPPROF dataset.
                          Default member name is ISPCOMND.
                          See below for details.
  QUIET                   Don't show any message.
  ID(desc)                Description.

 Sample
  IspCmdU da(user.parmlib mycmds) quiet


ISPCMDU can run  as an edit macro, allowing  for immediate command
table updates.


ISPCMDU command file details.

The first character  is a delimiter. Any character  except '-' may
be used,  as '-' indicates  deletion of the command.  It obviously
cannot be one that is part of the command itself. In the following
a slash '/' is used as the delimiter.
 Lines where the  first blank-delimited string (word)  is "/*" are
considered comment lines.
 Blank lines are ignored.

The command line format for adding commands is:

/verb/truncation/action/description/

'Verb' is  what you  write on the  command line,  'truncation,' is
the least number of characters  to enter (0=no truncation allowed,
and it must be >= 2), 'action' is what you wish ISPF to do for you
and  'description'  is an  optional  description  of the  command.

The format for deleting commands is:

-verb

Samples, these are  part of  my very  own ISPF  command additions:

/SDST/0/SELECT PGM(ISFISP) NEWAPPL(ISF) PARM(ST)/SDSF ST
/RACF/2/SELECT PANEL(ICHP00) NEWAPPL(RACF)/RACF Admin Panels


Implementing ISPCMDU

To  really make  it fly,  you must  invoke ISPCMDU  at ISPF  start
time. ISPCMDU only  works after ISPF has been  initialized, so you
must do it like this:

Add this REXX  pgm as name RUNISPF2, it combines  global and local
ISPCMDU definitions.

 Address IspExec /* REXX */
 "Select cmd(%IspCmdU da(PARMLIB) quiet)"      /* global */
 "Select cmd(%IspCmdU quiet)"                  /* user   */
 "Select PANEL(ISR@PRIM)"
 Exit 4

Replace  the   normal  ISPF   initialization  command,   'PDF'  or
'ISPSTART' with the following:

  Pdf cmd(RUNISPF2)


If you  wish to make changes  later, just edit a  command file and
issue the command ISPCMDU. It will automatically detect that is is
being run  as an edit  macro and load  the comnands from  the file
being edited.  And you don't even  have to save it  before running
ISPCMDU.


**Note This is not related to  ISPFCMDU, it's more a general note.
You should make sure that you do not have a ISPCMDS member in your
ISPPROF, or  if you have  then it  must be up  to date. I  had one
situation  where the  SWAPBAR command  caused an  'Invalid option'
messsage. It  turned out that  I had an  old ISPCMDS member  in my
ISPPROF datasets.  After I  deleted that, everything  was working.

)X
)O
