)F XISPTBL - Subroutine for ISPF table handling

Callable subroutine  for standard ISPF table  handling. The subroutine
has  built-in support  for  filtering, sorting  and  edit -  table-row
delete, edit, insert and repeat.
 You can also specify primary-  and linecommands for which an external
program is to be called.

It is recommended  that the table contains variable  ZSEL, otherwise a
temporary table  Wnnnnnnn is  created as  a copy.  Any changes  to the
temporary table are copied back to the original.


Syntax

 rv = XISPTBL(parameters)

Parameters

 ASEL(value)      Auto-select char. Set zsel to 'value' for
                  point-and-shoot selected lines. Default is 'S'.
 CRC(value)       Return code to set if changes were made. Default = 0.
 CPROC(name)      Name of program to call for primary commands not
                  handled internally.
                  See 'External programs' below for details.
 DPANEL(name)     Optional details panel, displayed for line commands
                  D, E, I, L and R.
 DPROC(name)      Name of program to call for primary commands from the
                  details edit panel.
                  See 'External programs' below for details.
 HDR(text)        List panel header (title). Imbedded paranthesis are
                  allowed, but must be paired, i.e HDR(just testing(1)).
 ICMD(text)       A command to run before first display, i. e. SORT or
                  a filter command.
 ISEL(list)       List of line commands to be handled internally. They
                  must be seperated by at least one blank.
                  If the DPANEL option is used then the named panel will
                  be shown, which allows the command to be verified and
                  aborted.
                  See Built-in line commands below for details.
 PANEL(name)      Table display panel for showing the list.
 PASSTEXT(text)   Pass 'text' to external procedure(s).
 POPUP            The table display will be shown as a popup panel.
 PROC(name)       Combined CPROC, DPROC and SPROC when the same external
                  program can be used.
                  See 'External programs' below for details.
 RETCMD(list)     List of commands causing XISPTBL to terminate, returning
                  the command. This can be used to redrive the list.
                  Values in the list may be abbreviated, see
                  'Abbreviations' below.
 SEARCHVAR(list)  List of variables used for the filter commands. Default
                  is all the variables.
 SEL(list)        List of line commands to be handled externally. The
                  PROC or SPROC parameter names the program.
 SELVAR(list)     List of variables containing action to take for a given
                  selection, see 'The SELVAR feature' section below for
                  details.
 SORT(list)       List of variable name(s) to use for the SORT command.
                  If this parameter is not specfied then SORT is not
                  allowed. The parameter can be an equal sign,
                  meaning all variables in the table.
 SPROC(list)      Name of program to call for line commands defined
                  by the SEL parameter.
                  See 'External programs' below for details.
 TABLE(name)      Name of table containg data.


The SELVAR feature

 This feature allows selection commands to be passed in the table,
 instead of having to call an external program.
 The value is a series of doublets: the selection character followed
 by the name of the variable containing the command. The command may
 start with some special values:
  ISPX text  - Do an ADDRESS ISPEXEC text
  TSOX text  - Do an ADDRESS TSO text
 Otherwise the text is INTERPRETed.
 Sample:
   "tbcreate" table "names(zsel dsname cmde cmdb cmdv)"
   cmde="ISPX edit dataset('"dsname"')"
   cmdb="ISPX browse dataset('"dsname"')"
   cmdv="ISPX view dataset('"dsname"')"
   "tbadd" table
   cc=XISPTBL('table('table') panel('panel')',
           'sel(e b v) selvar(e cmde b cmdb v cmdv)')


Abbreviations (RETCMD only)

 A list of names may contain an abbreviation length in parenthesis,
 like this:  NAME(1) allows 'N' as an abbreviation of 'NAME'.


Built-in primary commands

 Note that the built-in primary commmands cannot be disabled, only
 ammended. Also ISPF commands, built-in and user added, takes
 precedence to XISPTBL primary commands, unless prefixed by >.

 ALL               Show all lines.
 CANcel            Return with rc 8. If a temporary table is used,
                   then it is just dropped.
 END               Return with rc 0. If a temporary table is used,
                   then changes are applied to the base table.
 eXclude text      Exclude all lines containing 'text'. Note that
                   the data might not actually be on the display
                   if the variable containing the data is not in
                   the screen row model.
 Find text         Find next occurence of 'text'
 NEW               Insert line. The DPANEL parameter is required.
 Only text         Show only rows with 'text'. Note that the data
                   might not actually be displayed if the variable
                   is not in the screen row model.
 RESet             Show all lines.
 SORT              Sort lines based on the SORT parmeter.


Built-in line commands

 These are activated by the ISEL parameter.
 Note that the SEL parameters takes precedence over ISEL.

 D                 Delete row. If DPANEL parameter is used then the
                   named panel is shown for confirmation.
 E                 Edit. The DPANEL parameter is required.
 I                 Insert. This also activates the NEW primary command.
                   The DPANEL parameter is required.
 L                 List row details, requires the DPANEL parameter.
 R                 Repeat row. If DPANEL parameter is used then the
                   named panel is shown for confirmation.
                   Repeating a row in a keyed table will cause an error
                   if the key value(s) is not changed.
 S                 Show - alias of L
 X                 eXclude line from display. Note, this cannot be
                   changed by the SEL/ISEL operands as eXclude line
                   is part of the filter feature.
 ALL               All of the above


Point-and-shoot feature

 Enter key is pressed with the cursor on a displayed table row with
 empty 'zsel' field. Will use the ASEL value as selection.


External programs

 External  programs are  called when  the 'PROC',  'CPROC', 'DPROC'  or
 'SPROC' parameter is specified, and  the primary- or linecommand is to
 be handled externally (see the SEL operand).

 The program(s) are called with these parameters:

   XISPTBL   Identifies the call as comming from XISPTBL.
   id        the id option from the XISPTBL call
   CMD       this is a call for a primary command
   SEL       this is a call for a line (select) command
   table     either the table from the XISPTBL call, or a temporary
             table 'Wnnnnnnn' if the table did not include the ZSEL
             variable.
   cmd       the line- or primary command
   passtext  the value from the 'PASSTEXT' option of the XISPTBL call.

   i.e.
    linecmd: XISPTBL,8496350,SEL,P8496350,S,PRIM
    primcmd: XISPTBL,1194206,CMD,P1194206,A B,PRIM


Other members

 XISPTBD1   Demo  program  - simple  case,  display  table, allow  all
            built-in commands
 XISPTBD2   Demo program  - call  external routine (actually  self) to
            handle primary- and line commands.
 XISPTBLD   Sample panel for detail view/edit/delete
 XISPTBLL   Sample panel for listing the table


)X
)O
