Subject:     Utilities
From:        "Alex Kara" <alexkara@netspace.net.au>
Date:        Thu, 16 Aug 2007 19:00:40 +1000
To:          <sbgolob@cbttape.org>
CC:          <mzelden@flash.net>

Hi Sam,

Not sure whether the attached TTL (TERSE Toggler with
self-extracting IBM TERSMAIN program) may be of use on the CBT
site.  It front ends onto IBM's TERSE program to either TERSE (if
LRECL<>1024) or unTERSE (if LRECL=1024) and can be used on-line
or generate batch JCL for large datasets.  Found it useful for
downloading to the PC using the default IND$FILE when direct FTP
from the mainframe is not available and FTP needs to be done via
the PC.  Also included member $BR to browse tutorial output.
Just copy into a SYSPROC/SYSEXEC concatenated dataset and
eneter "TTL  /L" against any NON-VSAM/non-PDSE dataset (under
ISPF 3.4 display) or "TSO TTL ?" for help.  I have attached $BR
to supplement tutorial display.

Also, I have about 20 years backlog of handy little routines in
my toolbox and wouldn't mind sharing them before I retire.  Any
hints in what type of topics may be useful for sending to the
CBT tape.

I also often take routines from the CBT tape and enhance them.
Couple of examples are:

a) DASDSPCE which list all DASD, however, I present it in an
   interfaceable table that you can then use to go into ISPF 3.4
   (using the VOLSER option) etc...

b) Mark Winges RXVSAM, where I devised a REXX front end interface
   called EXECIOVS similar to the normal EXECIO REXX command.

One I have packaged, as I don't see such on the CBT site, is a
REXX based api to read/write storage from another address space
using cross-memory (XMEMSTOR).


Hi Mark,

I have used your CATSRCH interface quite extensively and have
made some minor modifications to make it a little more versatile
(basically return the output to the calling routine through the
Queue or OUTTRAPable SAY statements for stem processing).  All
changes should readily be identified by the eyecatcher ALK and
the commentary at the start.  I leave it to you whether you
consider them usefull.

I also notice in some of your routines you build the panel from
the REXX.  Not trying to tell you how to suck eggs but have a
look at the attached TTL REXX routine for an alternative
methodology for self generated members/tutorials/whatever.

Regards,
Alex Kara
(CSC Australia)

