 Chapter : $16Gloss

 Batch An accumulation of data brought together for
 processing or transmission, usually unattended. Less
 formally, the processing of such data, as opposed to
 on-line processing where an user is present to respond
 interactively, one record at a time.

 Dataset An unit of data storage and retrieval
 consisting of one or more data records. Outside of the
 IBM mainframe environment, people call them files.
 Dataset can be partioned (i.e. containing multiple
 files) or sequential (i.e. containing only data).

 DBCS stands for Double Byte Character Set. A mainframe
 way of coding non-latin character sets (i.e. chinese,
 japanese, etc).

 DTD Document Type Definition. This is a specific markup
 language, written using SGML.

 ISPF/PDF ISPF/Program Development Facility. ISPF
 facility providing access to application development
 services for end-users and programmers. Incorporates C
 and REXX programming support, and some support for
 programmable workstations.

 GUI stands for Graphical User Interface. A GUI
 application must be installed on each PC and makes
 extensive use of the mouse. By opposition, TUI is Text
 User Interface. A TUI application needs a connection
 program called an emulator and use only the keyboard to
 input data. BUI stands for Browser User Interface. A
 BUI program is an intranet or extranet application.

 HLQ High Level Qualifier. The left part of a dataset name.

 IVP Installation Verification Procedure. A set of tests
 to check if a product was correctly installed.

 JCL Job Control Language. The language used to describe
 the steps of a batch job (files to be used, programs to
 be run, etc). A generic term, hijacked by IBM to refer
 to the batch control languages for its System/360
 operating systems. Then, as now, z/OS and VSE/ESA JCL
 is a clumsy and cumbersome system that is hard to
 learn, full of inconsistencies, and avoided by anyone
 with an iota of common sense and access to an
 alternative. The only excuse for it comes from one of
 the original OS/360 developers: they ran out of time to
 build a JCL interpreter, so just used the Assembler
 macro processor, and built a language (JCL) around it.

 Mainframe Mainframes used to be defined by their size,
 and they can still fill a room, cost millions, and
 support thousands of users. But now a mainframe can
 also run on a laptop and support two users. So today's
 mainframes are best defined by their operating systems:
 Unix and Linux, and IBM's z/OS, OS/390, MVS, VM, and
 VSE. Mainframes combine four important features:

   * Reliable single-thread performance, which is
     essential for reasonable operations against a
     database.

   * Maximum I/O connectivity, which means mainframes
     excel at providing for huge disk farms.

   * Maximum I/O bandwidth, so connections between
     drives and processors have few choke-points.

   * Reliability--mainframes often allow for "graceful
     degradation" and service while the system is running.

 Member A file of a partitioned dataset.

 MVS Multiple Virtual Storage. In z/OSs long history,
 MVS has the honor of being its name for the longest
 period: about two decades. Admittedly, it had many
 suffixes during those years: MVS/SP, MVS/370, MVS/XA
 and MVS/ESA. Many users believed that MVS stood for Man
 Versus System.

 OS/390 The replacement for MVS/ESA announced at the end
 of 1995. It was an attempt to repackage MVS in a way
 that allowed IBM to offer attractive pricing at the
 lower levels, encourage developers to write
 applications in a shorter period of time, and generally
 improve the image of an operating system that is still
 largely identified with big iron and huge IT budgets.
 It also reduced IBMs testing costs dramatically because
 there was no longer a need to test every combination of
 supported releases of what were now components instead
 of separate system software products. This approach was
 first tested with DFSMS three and a half years earlier.
 In the longer term, OS/390 shielded MVS behind a layer
 of middleware that disguised many of the proprietary
 functions of MVS and provided users with common
 services across all the major IBM platforms. Replaced
 by z/OS on October 3, 2000, along with the introduction
 of eserver, including a complete line of mainframes
 called zSeries 900. Version 2 Release 10 was the last
 release of OS/390 and first became available September
 29, 2000.

 Panel IBM speak for screen layout.

 REXX Restructured EXtended eXecutor language. A command
 procedure programming language which was initially
 available on z/VM only, replacing EXEC and EXEC2, but
 later became an SAA standard. Although SAA is a distant
 memory, REXX availability in z/OS TSO has seen it
 replace CLIST as the tool of choice, especially given
 the fact that TSO, and therefore REXX, can be run in
 batch. REXX is an effective programming language in its
 own right with powerful string processing facilities
 and is used to drive certain program products, notably
 GDDM. REXX is also available in VSE/ESA, AIX1, OS/2,
 Linux and Windows. Although normally interpretive, a
 REXX compiler and library is available for z/OS and
 z/VM. REXX for CICS is available for z/OS and VSE/ESA;
 it consists of REXX Development System and REXX
 Development System. Object REXX is available for
 Windows, OS/2, AIX, and Linux for Intel and zSeries 900.

 Shell Generic term with a lot of different meanings.
 Early Internet service often involved an interface,
 called a Shell, on a host computer, rather than a
 direct connection to the Internet. And there was the
 IBM DOS Shell, a menu driven interface to basic PC-DOS
 functionality. Shell is also widely used in the expert
 systems and Unix communities, to mean software
 providing a skeleton which can be customized to produce
 a specific application.

 TSO Time Sharing Option. These days, everyone just says
 TSO when they mean TSO/E. Back in the 1980s, TSO was
 included with MVS/XA and you had to pay extra for
 TSO/E. Well worth the money given that TSO left you
 stranded below the 16MB line.

 TSO/E Time Sharing Option/Extensions. An element of
 z/OS that provides an on-line interactive environment
 for programmers and users. Best known for the ISPF/PDF
 environment that runs on TSO/E. Can also be used to
 test batch programs.

 Two's

 complement is a method of signifying negative numbers
 in binary. It is also an operation which may be applied
 to positive binary values in order to perform
 subtraction using the method of complements,
 effectively allowing subtraction of one binary number
 from another using only the addition operation.

 XUL The XML User Interface Language (XUL) is a markup
 language for describing user interfaces. With XUL you
 can create rich, sophisticated cross-platform web
 applications easily.


