Users Guide for TRYIT
by Lionel B. Dyck

Revised Feb 28, 2019

===== Table of Contents

      Source and License
      Introduction
      Usage

===== Source and License

The full source for TRYIT is distributed with the package, which may
be found at http://www.lbdsoftware.com

License: This code is distributed under the GPL License which may
be found at http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html

===== Introduction

TRYIT is an ISPF Edit command that is designed to be used to test an
Assembler program, CLIST, REXX Exec, JCL, ISPF Panel or ISPF Skeleton
while it is being edited. The way this works is such that the JCL,
CLIST, REXX Exec, ISPF Panel, or ISPF Skeleton does *not* have to be in
a library in the existing SYSPROC, SYSEXEC, ISPPLIB, or ISPSLIB
allocations thus allowing the development and testing in other, less
critical, data sets.

If a JCL Syntax checking product is available then TRYIT can be used
to invoke it - this is assuming the product can be invoked as an ISPF
Edit Macro (e.g. CA-JCLCheck and JCLPrep).

For Assembler programs the active member will be assembled and optionally
linkedited into a specified target library. After entering TRYIT the user
will be prompted to enter the assembly and linkedit information if the
member is determined to be an assembler program.

For CLIST and REXX Exec members the active data set in which the member
resides will be allocated using the TSO ALTLIB facility and then the
member executed, along with any passed optional parameters.

For ISPF Panels and ISPF Skeletons the active data set in which the
member resides will be allocated using the ISPF LIBDEF facility then
then the panel Displayed or Selected based upon the parameters provided
to TRYIT. If there are any errors in the panel or skeleton an ISPF
message will be displayed and the error may then be corrected using ISPF
Edit and TRYIT used once again to verify the panel or skeleton - all
without the need to split the screen and invoke ISPF Test.

Note there are limitations to the Skeleton testing as variables and
imbed tables may not be available.

Because of the use of ALTLIB or LIBDEF the member being tested will be
able to find subroutines or other ISPF Panels providing they reside
within the data set being edited thus allowing an entire package to be
developed, updated, and/or tested, in less critical libraries.

The type of member being edited is dynamically determined with a default
of REXX Exec assumed if all the tests fail. The tests include:

        1) The data set suffix
           - Assembler: ASM ASSEM
           - CLIST: CLIST, SYSPROC, CMDPROC
           - REXX:  EXEC, REXX, SYSEXEC
           - Panel: PANEL, PANELS, ISPPLIB
           - Skels: SKEL, SKELS, ISPSLIB
        2) CLIST: Look for PROC followed by a number on record 1
        3) REXX: Look for the word REXX in record 1
        4) Panel: Look for any of these in record 1
           )ATTR )PANEL )CCSID )PROC )BODY )INIT )REINIT ..PREP:
        5) JCL: First record starts with //

This provides a very easy method for iterative testing and updating of
the member until the member works as desired.

===== Usage

Use TRYIT from any ISPF Edit command line while editing a CLIST, REXX Exec, or
ISPF Panel. The syntax is:

    TRYIT optional-parms

The optional-parms are:

     ? to display the ISPF Tutorial

     For CLISTs and REXX Execs any parameters that the member being edited
     would need to have passed to it.

     For Assembler there are not supported options at this time.

     For ISPF Panels one, or more, of the following:

         APPL followed by a 1 to 4 character application id to be
             used when SEL is specified to select the panel
         POP will cause the panel to be displayed as a popup
             - optionally POP may be followed by a row and column
               to be used for the popup
         SEL will Select the panel instead of just Displaying it
         TUT will display the panel as an ISPF Tutorial
             (default is to just display the panel)

     For example:

          EDIT       hlq.test.exec(sample)
          Command ===> tryit opt1 opt2

Upon completion of the processing of the member a message is displayed
in the upper right with a return code or short message with a long
message, available by pressing PF1 (Help), with more information.  For
CLISTs and REXX Execs the return code is whatever the CLIST or REXX Exec
return while for ISPF Panels the message is either a zero return code if
there are no problems or the short and long error messages generated by
the ISPF Display, Selection, or Tutorial services.

For Assembler programs upon completion of the assembly the assembly
listing will be displayed using ISPF browse. If a load library is
specified under the link edit options then after the linkedit the
linkedit listing will also be displayed using ISPF Browse.  The
linkedit will only occur if the assembly completes with a return code
less than 8.
