
          General notes on dissassembling programs

Much of this comes from studying DISAS. Although it was not a dissassembly it
had so few comments it might as well have been one. Also see Sam Golobs articles
in Technical Support for January and March 94. They are available on CBT file
120.

1: Don't unless you have to. Making sense of a dissassembly of a non-trivial
program is a big job. Time spent looking for the source code is rarely wasted.

2: Find out as much about the program as you can before you start. Input and
output layout is very useful. A current CSECT map and cross-reference is
invaluable if it has more than one CSECT. Source for an old version is a big
help.

3: Dissassemble an object deck produced by the assembler or compiler if you can.
The object deck only includes text with a value specified in the source deck,
DSes aren't included. When the module is linked the DSes are filled in with
whatever was in the linkage editors buffers at the time, often binary zeroes but
it can be anything. When the LMOD is delinked whatever went into the DSes
appears as text, and in the dissassembly as data or instructions. With the
original object deck DSes appear in the dissassembly as DS.

4: If you need to delink LMODs use DELINKI off CBT file 90 instead of DELINK0 if
you can. DELINK0 does not support weak external references, AMODE or RMODE other
than 24 or read only sections (RSECTs). Thus all WXTRNs become EXTRNs, and all
sections appear as CSECTS with AMODE 24, RMODE 24. You can get an executable
version of DELINKI on CBT file 135 if you don't have a PL/I compiler.

5: If you have something like ASMPUT to help understand programs try it out on
the dissassembly. You won't find source with fewer comments! You might want to
assemble the output to generate a cross reference listing etc.

6: Remember Edison's statement that genius is 1% inspiration and 99%
perspiration. Study the generated source carefully. Look at the data area for
readable messages. For every label in the code check where it is used. Put a
comment on constants to say they are constants. For every variable try to work
out what it does. Look for loops in the code, put a comment at the start and
end. Put a comment on subroutines even before you know what they do. Try to
identify external control blocks that are being accessed.

7: When you start changing labels, using symbolic addressing etc you should do
test assemblies at suitable intervals and compare the result with the original.
At least do one just before making any change intended to alter the resultant
load module.
