****** Copied from www.robinandmariette.com/Mvs/Rexx/RexxUtils.asp *****

Robin Murray's Rexx Tools/Utilities

These utilities have been tested using OS/390 2.10 as of March
2004.  They will be tested on z/OS 1.4 as soon as possible.

These utilities are provided as is with no warranties or
guarantees of any kind whatsoever.  Use at your own risk!

The libraries are in xmit format, and are zipped into an archive.
To install:

    * Follow the instructions in the $RUNME member to recieve the
      rest of the libs.
    * In the SAMPLIB dataset, follow the directions in members
      $INSTALL, $IVP, and $INSTAL2, in that order.
    * If installing SVCDUMPS, follow the directions in members
      $INSTALL, and $IVP of MA133.TSO.SVCDUMPS.SYSEXEC.

Last updated:  8-May-2004

Utility  Description

$START   A model for starting most reasonably complex programs.
         Just copy this into your new member and begin customizing
         it.  For details on why I start rexx programs this way,
         see my hints and tips section.

$TBDISPL A model to display an ISPF table.  Copy this code into
         your program and make a few adjustments to display your
         table.  Contains boiler plate code for handling both
         primary and line commands.

APARSTRP A program to strip off the comments from CA supplied
         PTFs.  Used in conjunction with EACHMEM and possibly
         FTPPDS.

COMPRESS A program to compress a PDS.  Can be run either as an
         edit macro or as a TSO exec.  Useful when you get out of
         space errors while in edit: simply enter COMPRESS on the
         command line and save again.

DELALL   Deletes all datasets beginning with the passed high
         level qualifier(s).  Uses ISPF 3.4 masking if ISPF is
         active for greater flexibility.

DUPMEM   Checks for duplicate members of a concatenation. Pass the
         DDName of the concatanation and a card deck will be generated
         that can be fed to the PDS program to delete them.  LINKLIST
         and LPALIST can also be passed as the DDName, and the current,
         in-storage concatenation will be checked.

EACHMEM  To process a PDS by calling the passed rexx program for
         each member.  It's meant as a generalized service to
         process all members of a PDS.

FTPPDS   A utility to ftp a remote directory to a PDS or a PDS to
         a remote directory.  Uses a profile dataset to store the
         commands to be executed.  Can be run in batch or online.

GO       A simple edit macro to execute the member you are
         editing.  Simply enter GO on the command line along with
         any parms to execute your program.  Pending changes are
         automatically saved before the exec is run.  If the save
         fails, a compress is run and the save is attempted
         again.

NJ       To navigate through lengthy and complex JCL.
         Front-ends CA's JCLCHECK product with several ISPF
         tables.  Presents several different views of the JCL
         including datasets, programs, procedures, reports, and
         JCL errors.  Allows you to select any line to take you
         to the exact JCL source line to which it corresponds,
         no matter if it's in stream or in a procedure.  Allows
         you to zoom in to datasets on the dataset view.  See
         the job navigator section for more details on this
         powerful utility.

QUOTES   A simple edit macro to flag lines that have uneven or
         missing quotes.

RESTART  An IOF rexx to process the joblog and create a series of
         IDCAMS delete statements so that you can restart the job.

SAVELIB  A quick way to make a backup copy of a PDS.

SORTTB   To sort any ISPF table passed to it.  Pops up a small
         panel where you can select Ascending or Decsending sort
         sequences on any field in the table.  A good utility to
         call from another program to allow complex sorting on a
         table.

SRCHGO   Used in the Search-For IBM utility to allow you to zoom
         in from the lines in the search results list to edit the
         target dataset where the line was found.

STARTUP  An ISPF session manager to allow you to create and
         easily navigate thru many concurrent ISPF sessions.
         Combines the functionality of the ISPF START, SCRNAME,
         SWAP LIST, and SWAP XXX command into one easy to
         remember command.  Allows dynamic command tables to be
         built for each individual user.  See the startup command
         section for more details.

SWIMACRO A sample site-wide initial edit macro showing how to
         create special protection for certain key system
         datasets like SYS1.PARMLIB and others.  Ensures that
         AUTOSAVE is OFF for these particular datasets so that
         any changes will require a manual SAVE command before
         leaving your edit session.

CATLIBS  A new and unique way to concatenate the required TSO and
         ISPF libraries at logon time.  Separates products into
         convenient parmlib members that are assigned as needed
         to each user group.  It's so flexible it can hardly
         stand up.  Automatically recovers from missing /
         enqueued / misspelled datasets.  See the CatLibs section
         for more details.

Finders  A group of find commands to quickly and easily find
         source library members of various sorts and by various
         methods.  See the find utilities section for more
         details on this group of very useful programs.  They are
         indispensible in our shop.

SVCDUMPS A modern SVC dump manager. Creates a log of your SVC dumps.
         Allows ISPF table interaction with the log of dumps. Allows
         interactive archiving, recalling, tersing, ftping, deletion
         etc.  All dump management can be automated using one
         multi-purpose started task.

