 Name:        SCCPDSD

 Purpose:     Obtain selected directory entries from the specified DDname
              into a stemmed variable or into the data stack.

 Environment: REXX subroutine/function for all MVS/ESA environments.
              SCCPDSD resides in the IRXFLOC "function package".


 Arguments:
           1. The DDname of the library.

              The DDname must be pre-allocated to the library. That
              allocation must not be done at the member level.

           2. The selection criterea. The critera is composed of
              natural characters and/or the 'wildcard' values
              '*' and '%'

              Refer to the WILDCARD function for details of how this
              critera may be used.

           3. The name of the REXX stem variable to receive the
              directory entries.  The caller must ensure this
              specification is enclosed within quotes.

              If argument 3 is not specified (or specified as null),
              the directory entries are placed in the data stack.


 Results: (when 'stem.' is specified at argument 3)
              'stem.0' contains a count of the number of directory entries.

              'stem.1' through 'stem.stem.0' contains the individual
              directory entries.

          (when argument 3 is null):
              The data stack contains directory entries read in FIFO order.

          (independent of argument 3)
              As a REXX subroutine/function SCCPDSD must return a result
              to the caller. SCCPDSD returns the number (relative to 0)
              of datasets concatenated within the DDname.


 Notes:
   1. Choice of a technique to manage the 'data stack' is a
      subjective matter. SCCPDSD makes no choice. If the REXX
      program requires stack isolation, the programmer must
      use an appropriate technique.

   2. Each invokation off SCCPDSD collects all the directory
      entries from all the datasets within the concatenation.
      The resuts are produced by filtering the entire set against
      the users selection criterea. If the application requires
      more than one filter, it is probably more efficient to select
      all members and apply the filtering (see Wildcard) within
      the calling exec.

   3. SPFDIR is an independent function that takes a directory entry with
      SPF stats and reformats it into ebcdic format


 Examples:
   1. List the unique member names and concatenation level for the
      libraries allocated to DDname SYSUT1.

      call sccpdsd 'SYSUT1', '*', 'D.'
      member_name = ''
      do d# = 1 to d.0
           if left(d.d#,8) \= member_name then
                say left(d.d#,8) '+'c2d(substr(d.d#,12,1))
           member_name = left(d.d#,8)
      end
