 Name:        SCCPDSR


 Purpose:     Read a specified member of a specified DDname into either
              a stemmed variable or into the data stack.

 Features:    Determination of ISRLEMX compression is made internally and
              decompression is performed automatically.

 Environment: REXX subroutine/function for all MVS/ESA environments.
              SCCPDSR resides in the IRXFLOC "function package".

 Arguments:
           1. The DDname of the library.

              The DDname must be pre-allocated to the library. That
              allocation must not be done at the member level.

           2. The name of the member within the library. If the entire
              directory entry (as per SCCPDSD) is available, then
              the first 12 bytes of the directory should be provided
              to SCCPDSR. See also argument 5.

           3. The name of the REXX stem variable to receive the
              records. The caller must ensure this specification is
              enclosed within quotes.

              If argument 3 is not specified (or specified as null),
              the records are placed in the data stack.

           4. (optional) The length of each record.hin the library.
              By default, 80 is used. If the member records are
              longer than 80 bytes, this argument must be spedcified
              to receive the entire record.

           5. (optional) The name of a variable which will be assigned
              the value of the directory entry associated with the
              member. The argument is redundant and ignored if argument
              2 is coded with TTR information.  The value of the
              directory entry will be formatted as per SCCPDSD; the
              function SPFDIR can be used to format an ISPF style entry
              in ebcdic values.

 Results: (when 'stem.' is specified at argument 3):
              'stem.0' contains a count of the number of records.

              'stem.1' through 'stem.stem.0' contains the individual
              records.

          (when argument 3 is null):
              The data stack contains records read in FIFO order.

          (independent of argument 3)
              As a REXX subroutine/function SCCPDSR must return a
              result to the caller. SCCPDSR returns a value indicative
              of internal errors. Typically this value is 000; if it
              is not all other results are suspect and incomplete.

              If the specified member name (argument 2) is not found in the
              concatenation of the directories, the result will be 004.

 Notes:
    Choice of a technique to manage the 'data stack' is a subjective
    matter. SCCPDSR makes no choice. If the REXX program requires stack
    isolation, the programmer must use an appropriate technique.

    If SCCPDSR is used subsequent to the use of SCCPDSD against the same
    DDNAME and the DDNAME is a concatenation of multiple datasets with
    unhomoginous blocksizes, special action is required.  For such a
    situation, the allocation of the DDNAME must be such that the
    largest blocksize is associated with the first dataset in the
    concatenation either by coding a BLKSIZE parameter with the first
    dataset or by placing the dataset with the largest blocksize first
    in the concatenation.
