 Name:        SCXAMS

 Purpose:     Provide a REXX program with a direct interface to IDCAMS. e

 Environment: REXX subroutine/function for all MVS/ESA environments.
              SCXAMS resides in the IRXFLOC "function package".

 Features:    All the capabilities of IDCAMS are available except
              for those requiring APF. Only the DCOLLECT and SHCDS
              commands are precluded.

              The REXX variable "rc" is always set to the value
              return code from IDCAMS

              The results of the IDCAMS command are returned either
              to the program stack (by default) or to a series
              of stemmed variables.

              The starting point for the series of stemmed variables
              can be controlled by pre-setting the value for stem.0

 Arguments:   There are two possible arguments; both are optional.

           1. The IDCAMS command(s) to be issued. If not not specified
              LISTC (with no operands) is used.

              Multiple commands may be 'strung together' provided each
              command is terminated with a semicolon. The total length
              of all commands must not exceed 32760 bytes.

           2. The name of the stem variable to receive the output
              "records".  (If this argument is omitted, SCXAMS will
              dispose of the output records to the program stack.

              The argument (when used) must specify a stem variable
              name including the period. It should/must be enclosed
              within quotation marks.

              SCXAMS normally uses stem.1 for the first output
              "record".  If stem.0 is assigned the value "n", then
              output begins at stem.n. This technique can be used
              to add entries to an existing range.

 Results:     The REXX special variable "rc" is set with the value
              of the return code from IDCAMS's execution of the
              command.

              When argument 2 is omitted, the 'print' records generated
              by IDCAMS are placed into the program stack.  The calling
              REXX program must maintain the program stack.

              When argument 2 is specified, the 'print' records
              generated by IDCAMS are placed into the a series of
              stemmed variables. 'stem.0' is assigned the value 'n'
              where 'n' is the last stem variable completed by SCXAMS.


 Notes:
    The calling program can collect all the results of a series of
    IDCAMS commands into one series of stemmed variables by not
    adjusting stem.0 between the calls to SCXAMS.

    SCXAMS calls IDCAMS and provides I/O exit routines for the ddnames
    SYSIN and SYSPRINT. SCXAMS filters out the page header and blank
    lines directed to I/O exit for SYSPRINT. It also eliminates the
    print carriage control characters.
