 Name:        VOL4DD

 Purpose:     Return the volume serial number(s) of (a concatenation
              level of) a dataset for a specified DDname.

 Environment: REXX subroutine/function for all MVS/ESA environments.
              VOL4DD resides in the IRXFLOC "function package".

 Features:    The value of the volume serial number is returned as
              per the invocation construct.

              The REXX variable RC is set to the number of
              concatenation levels for the DD.

 Argument:    The DDname for which the dataset name is required.

              The DDname can be further qualified with a suffix in
              format  +n  where "n" is a number relative to 1 of
              the concatenation within the DDname.


 Results:     VOL4DD operates as a REXX subroutine/function. When
              used as a subroutine, the caller retrieves the value
              from the REXX variable RESULT. When used as a
              function, REXX makes the requested assignment from the
              context of REXX statement which invoked it.

              If the specified DDname is allocated to multiple volumes,
              VOL4DD returns a character string listing the volume
              serial numbers separated by commas. If the DDname is
              allocated to more than 5 volumes, only the first five
              are listed by VOL4DD.

              VOL4DD always sets the REXX variable RC. For a request
              which is matched without error, RC is asigned the number
              of datasets which are concatenated together. If there is
              no concatenation, RC will be assigned the value one.

 Errors/Warnings:
              If the DDNAME is not allocated or the argument is missing,
              RC will be assigned the value of minus one and the result
              will be null.

              If the DDNAME is allocated but the requested concatenation
              level is invalid or beyond the allocated concatenation
              level, the 'result' will be null and RC is assigned the
              number of datasets allocated within the concatenation
              level.

 Examples: 1. say VOL4dd('SYSPROC+1')  ==> ST3S03

