              SETUP OF A&P SOFTWARE INVENTORY SYSTEM
              --------------------------------------


      The A&P Software Inventory System requires a rather elaborate
setup procedure.  I hope to make it a bit easier, with this explanation.

      It is highly recommended that an experienced SAS programmer, if
one is available, administer this system.  You can make do with a less
experienced SAS programmer, as we have (me), but it makes the going
that much rougher.

      This partitioned dataset was designed to be as self-contained as
possible, and even the PROCs are executed out of this pds with JCLLIB
cards.  You have to globally change all occurrences of the names

           WSBG.WVOL.SOURCE
           WSBG.WVOL.LOADLIB
           WSBG.WVOL.FMTLIB

to whatever name these dsns will have on your system.  Of course, change
the JOBCARD member, and all the job cards, to fit your system.

      The data gatherer jobs are:  SBGSTG1 and SBGSTG2.  The SAS
reporting jobs are called SBGPRE and SBGPRCR.  The purpose of the
setup is to feed these 4 jobs with all the material they need, to
run meaningfully on your system.  Our SAS proc is included here.
We are running SAS 6.09 at this time.

      Therefore, the first thing you need to do is to go over each
of these 4 jobs, and check the appropriate members on this pds, to
see if and how, they need to be adjusted for your system.

      For convenience, the load modules needed, are included here
in a load library, packaged in XMIT format on this pds.  Do a
TSO RECEIVE INDS(WSBG.WVOL.SOURCE(LOADLIB)) to create the load
library.  The format member $FMID, creatable by running the job
FMTTPRD, is included, for the FMIDs that we have coded here.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The way this package has to be customized, consists of several
steps:

 1 -  Determine your list of DLIBs, Target Libs, Execution Libs,
      and SMP/E Libs, and customize the DLIB, TLIB, XLIB, and SMPE
      members of this pds.  Be careful to adhere to the column
      conventions.  Columns 1-2 contain optional control cards
      telling you what kind of library each library is.  This
      information shows up on some of the SAS reports.

      Customize these 4 members carefully for your shop.  This is
      probably going to be a tedious job, unless you have a way
      to automate it.

 2 -  Create the list of FMIDs in your shop, and run the jobs:
      FMTPRD, FMTLIBAL, and INVFMID1.  Provide each job with the
      information it needs, according to your shop's environment.
      You'll have to assign each library on the 4 dataset control
      members, with an FMID as well.  If you want the FMIDs to show
      up on the reports, you've got to do this.  However, you might
      want to put this step off a bit, and have some blank FMIDs in
      the reports for a while.

 3 -  Once these first 2 steps have been done, you have to make a
      list of the disk packs which contain your system software.
      You have to make this list as complete as possible, or the
      SAS jobs will not show the proper information.  After you
      have a list of all packs containing all of your DLIBs, TLIBs,
      XLIBs and SMPE libraries, then customize the SBGSTG1 and
      SBGSTG2 jobs to point to all of those packs.  See if you can
      get these jobs to run, creating the STG1PNCH and STG2PNCH
      partitioned datasets.

 4 -  Now try and get the SBGPRE job to run.  After that job looks
      OK, try and get the SBGPRCR job to run.  You should find the
      reports full and interesting.  Again, it is quite necessary
      that a programmer versed in the SAS language should administer
      this system.  It might not (or then again it might) run well,
      out of the box.  You might also want to design more reports
      for this system, once you see what the data is like.  Again,
      it sure helps, if an experienced SAS programmer is administering
      this system.


 Best of luck.

