Date: Wed, 1988 Mar 16   16:55 EST
From: (John F. Chandler)   PEPMNT@CFAAMP.BITNET
Subject: Announcing IBM Mainframe MVS/TSO Kermit Version 4.0
Keywords: IBM 370 Kermit, MVS/TSO Kermit, TSO Kermit
Xref: IBM Mainframe, Also see IBM 370
Xref: MVS/TSO Kermit, Also see MVS/TSO Kermit, IBM 370

This is to announce TSO Kermit Release 4.0.  The program is now a member
of the generic family Kermit-370 and appears in the Kermit distribution
under a new prefix: all TSO-specific files begin with IKT, while generic
Kermit-370 files begin with IK0 (I K Zero).  Kermit-TSO no longer
consists of just two source files.  Instead, the source is split into
sub-files, some generic and some TSO-specific.  The separate pieces are
to be recombined into a single composite source (or made into a macro
library) for installation.  See the file IKTKER.INS for instructions.
Generally, the files formerly known as TS*.* will be replaced by the new
IKTKER.* files.  This TSO Kermit is still in the testing stage, but most
of the features described in the documentation have already been
verified.  Any bug reports should be sent to John Chandler
<PEPMNT@CFAAMP.BITNET>.

Below is a list of the more important additions in Version 4.0:

    --- generic features (same as announced for CMS last December) ---

1.  Code reorganization into generic 370 and system-specific sections.

2.  Optional separate translation tables for counteracting the system
    conversion of terminal I/O.

3.  New GIVE command for saving a modified translation table.

4.  A new, RAW debug mode for recording the packet traffic as actually
    sent and received on "GRAPHICS" and "SERIES1" devices.

5.  Preservation of the case of commands as typed, with uppercase
    conversion of only those words that must be uppercase.

6.  New SET MARGIN command for limiting the width of a file to be sent.

7.  Settable tab stops for Kermit's conversion of tabs to spaces
    (alternative to the default 1, 9, 17, etc.).

8.  Support for multiple terminal controller types.

9.  New DIRECTORY and HOST subcommands following Kermit standard.

10. Combination of file-attribute SET subcommands (FILE-TYPE, LRECL,
    BLKSIZE, and RECFM) into a new group SET FILE.

11. Separate retry limits for initial and subsequent packet exchanges.

12. Pad binary records on disk with nulls, rather than blanks.

13. Automatically tune packet length when sending long packets according
    to heuristic optimum based on sparse Poisson statistics, provided
    that transmission errors do occur.

14. Expand STATUS report to include the number of files in the last
    transfer, throughput statistics, heuristic optimum packet length
    (when long packets are enabled), and the reason for any file
    rejection based on A-packets.

15. New command TDUMP NAMES to display the list of files sent in the
    last transfer.

16. Send and acknowledge attribute packets.  Add file creation date to
    A-packet repertoire.

17. REMOTE COPY and REMOTE RENAME commands to a server at the other end.

18. Allow long packets through a 7171 with VTAM.

19. New type D-BINARY for binary files with undelimited variable-length
    records.

20. SET 8-BIT-QUOTE.  Allow 8-bit data where possible via SET PARITY.

21. SET SYSCMD, so that Kermit can be told to try "illegal" subcommands
    as host system commands instead of just rejecting them.

22. SET PROMPT subcommand.

23. Remember parameters specified by the other Kermit in I-packets.

24. Keep track of truncated records during a RECEIVE operation and
    report the count in STATUS; also call truncation an error after
    everything is received.

25. SET HANDSHAKE subcommand to alter or suppress handshake character
    Kermit-370 sends out after each packet (not available for 3705's).

    --- features new to TSO Kermit ---

Since Version 4.0 is the first release of Kermit-370 for TSO, some of
these "new" features are actually new only to the Columbia distribution
for TSO.

26. Suppression of LINE and CHAR delete functions during protocol mode.

27. Advanced server functions and subcommands for talking to another
    Kermit running in server mode.

28. Long packet protocol.

29. TYPE, ECHO, XTYPE, and XECHO subcommands (the last two being
    Series/1 analogs of the first two.)

30. REMOTE KERMIT commands honored by TSO server, including SET, SHOW,
    TAKE, TDUMP, STATUS, HOST, TSO, CWD, DIR, and TYPE.

31. TEST mode for debugging.

32. Multi-column, two-level, selective SHOW display.

33. Optionally append to, rather than replace, old data sets with
    duplicate names.

34. Automatic detection of terminal controller type (TTY or SERIES1).

35. SYNADAF message in cases of disk I/O error.

------------------------------

Date: Thu, 1988 Sep 8 23:21 EDT
From: (John F. Chandler) PEPMNT@CFAAMP.BITNET
Subject: Announcing a Partial Re-release of TSO Kermit
Keywords: IBM 370 Kermit, 370 Kermit, TSO Kermit, MVS/TSO

This is to announce a number of modifications to release 4.0 of TSO
Kermit-370.  The most noticeable change is in the installation procedure --
the revised IKTKER.INS contains a batch job that can be submitted to install
Kermit from scratch all in one step (after allocating a pair of datasets by
hand).  One by-product of the new procedure is a version of the update
utility GUPI-TSO that can be used either interactively or in batch.  There
is now a HELP file for GUPI.  Numerous bugs in Kermit have been fixed (as
promised in a recent edition of IKTKER.BWR), and several new features have
been added.  Among them are:

1. A subcommand SET LONGLINE, to select the desired processing of lines
   received by TSO that exceed the LRECL -- the options are to fold,
   truncate or simply halt.

2. LRECL is now treated by Kermit exactly the way MVS does -- it must be
   four greater than the actual data length for RECFM=V files.

3. File allocation error messages are now saved in Kermit and reported
   as part of the STATUS text.

4. Kermit-370 automatically detects three types of terminal connections
   and sets CONTROLLER accordingly -- to TTY for line-mode terminals
   (3705, 3708, etc.), to SERIES1 for terminals hooked through protocol
   converters of the Yale ASCII family (Series/1, 7171, 4994, etc.), and
   to GRAPHICS for any other kind of full-screen device.

By the way, items 1 and 4 will soon be available for CMS as well.

This revision of Kermit requires not only a fresh copy of IKTKER.UPD, but
also replacements for four of the source components: IKTDYN.ASM, IKTGUP.ASM,
IK0GUP.ASM, and IKTMAC.ASM.  Note: if you try to install Kermit without
these new sources, the batch job will issue an error message in the update
step.

¢Ed. - Many thanks, John.  The new files have been installed in Kermit
Distribution, along with a new file, IK0CON.HLP, that describes the
technical aspects of supporting (or adding support for) the various 370
console devices.|

------------------------------


