Using zip and unzip:
--------------------

The usage message is displayed when either program is executed as a batch EXEC
or as a TSO command processor (in TSO "alloc fi(stdout) da(*)" is required.)

Usage : minizip -abco zipfile files_to_add
-a opens files_to_add in text-translated mode and converts EBCDIC to ASCII.
-b zips files without length indicators (use with V,VB or U datasets only).
-c chooses the alternate code-page 037 instead of the default 1047.
-o specifies that all files_to_add are Partition Organised datasets and
that all members/alias's in each dataset should be zipped.
SYSUT1 and zipfile need to be allocated as F/FB with any LRECL and BLKSIZE.

Usage : miniunz -aclv zipfile dest_file file_to_extract
-a opens files in text-translated mode and converts ASCII to EBCDIC.
-c chooses the alternate code-page 037 instead of the default 1047.
-l or -v only lists statistics and files in the zip archive.
If no file_to_extract is specified, all files are extracted and
the destination file will have (member) automatically appended.

Usage Notes:
------------

minizip has additional options "-0" to "-9" which select how aggressively the
algorithms check for better compression.  "-0" stores the files with no
compression.

All specified filenames default to DD style names, to specify full pathnames
of MVS datasets use the following convention: //DSN:SYSX.DATASET.NAME

If the DD name or DSN refers to a Partitioned Organised dataset, then member
names can be added as usual eg. "MYDDNAME(MYMEMBER)"  When zipping with the
"-o" PO dataset option, do not specify a member name as a file_to_add.  When
unzipping all members of a zipfile by not specifying a file_to_extract, do
not specify a member as the dest_file.

When zipping files on the MVS platform, a comment is added with each zipped
file to indicate the dataset format from where the data came.  This includes
an initial character which describes any conversion 'A' is ASCII, 'E' is
for the default of no conversion or EBCDIC data, and 'B' stands for the
special zip mode where only the raw dataset data is stored.  The initial
character is followed by a comma (",") then the recfm and lrecl.  The 'B' mode
is not really for general use - but programmers may find it handy.

eg.
"E,FB80"
"A,VB8192"

When listing the contents of zip files with -v in miniunz, the comment, if it
exists, is displayed after the filename within braces "{" & "}".

When using text-translated mode, MSDOS style CRLF text files are converted to
just LF when unzipping files.  This conversion is not performed in reverse when
zipping text files on the MVS platform - the resulting text files must be later
converted (eg. by using WinZip and a program like WordPad) if the Windows
platform is the target.  Note *nix platforms expect only LF characters in
text files.

There is no provision in minizip to UPDATE an existing zip file.

Enjoy your free zip and unzip for MVS.
Jason Winter.

