REVIEW Release Notes for Release 49.7

REVIEW is a 3270 fullscreen TSO command processor for MVS.
REVIEW also functions correctly under TSS on MSP systems.

The source for REVIEW is available on the CBT MVS tape,
and is in the public domain, as is the data contained herein.

The REVIEW home page and FAQ are can be accessed from
http://www.prycroft6.com.au

Bug reports welcome.

Enjoy.  GP@P6
Email - service2@prycroft6.com.au
For the current email address visit
http://www.prycroft6.com.au/contact.html


R26.0 notes:

This release has built-in support for the FSHELP and FSH aliases of HEL,
and includes the new 'FORMAT"/'FMT' and 'FMTVAR'/'FV' subcommands.
Note also that '=X' and '=CAN' are now valid member list subcommands.


R27.0 notes:

This release allows PDS searching with '=SEARCH' from the directory list.
Use '=HELP' to see what is available from the directory list.
REMEMBER - if any members are tagged then only these members will be
searched (or offloaded).  Use '=RESET' to untag all members.


R28.0 notes:

This release introduces the "point-and-shoot" capability
which is triggered by invoking REVIEW with no operands.
REVIEW does a read buffer to get the DSNAME under the
cursor.  This works from the TSO READY prompt (except
for Session Manager which updates the screen before
REVIEW gets control) and in fullscreen mode.

For best results under ISPF, set up a PF key with
         TSO REV) MODE(FSCR
exactly as shown above.

You also may wish to set up a REVIEW PF key with
         TSO REV
to allow point-and-shoot recursive REVIEWs.

Note that a recursive REVIEW with no operands is
terminated unless a point-and-shoot DSNAME is found.
This is to avoid TSO prompting with no ability to
interrupt out of it.

Also note that for point-and-shoot purposes, a
member name is NOT considered to be part of a DSNAME.

R28.1 allows the S member selection code even for
same-named members in a concatenation.

R28.2 restores the terminal to line mode when
"point 'n' shoot" can't process a data set.
Also, PF5/17 can now find the first member in
a member list if it is tagged.

R29.0 makes the FIND, F and FINDNOT subcommands case insensitive.
FINDCHR, FC and FCN remain case sensitive.
FINDPIC, FP and FPN have been added.  eg. FP ###  looks for 3 digits.
These commands can all be selected from the member list to search
the whole file (one or more PDSs).
A RACROUTE is now issued for non-pre-allocated non-VSAM data sets on
ACF2 systems to avoid leaving a data set allocated after a S913 abend.
(OPEN ABEND EXIT processing handles this for RACF systems since R26.0.)
The screen buffer has been enlarged so that REVIEW may now actually
work on a 62 by 160 screen (logic added 4 and a half years ago).

R29.1 no longer displays ?? under AC for unauthorized program objects.

R29.2 fixes case insensitive searches with ASCII ON.  Picture searches
are not allowed with ASCII ON.  Case insensitivity is ignored if there
are no alphabetics in the search argument, thus speeding up searches.
=SEARCH status indicators are improved.

R29.3 fixes ZAP IDR formatting when ESDID values are invalid.

R29.4 fixes recursion detection, fixes searching for data specified
with no trailing quote, and allows the use of double-quotes for
quoting strings.  Eg. FIND "=C'FRED',"

R29.5 enhances DEBUG output for diagnosis purposes.

R29.6 fixes 2 possible S0C4 problems with unexpectedly long input,
and allows finding a quote character.  Eg. FIND '    and FIND "

Note that REVSMF has minor updates for formatting CICS and STOTEK
silo (SLSS) SMF records.

R29.7 fixes SUB.  (SUBMIT still worked.)

R29.8 fixes RDW handling for non-VSAM DSECT formatting.

Note that REVSMF can extract some WLM service class statistics
from type 72 subtype 3 RMF SMF records.

R29.9 fixes an error handling QUERY TGET data lengths longer than 256
bytes.  The extra data length overlaid the display translate table
which caused corrupted data display and sometimes caused terminal
errors requiring TSO session cancellation.  (The reported observation
was with CM/2 terminal emulation under OS/2.)  And now a word about
IDRs in load modules:
     Data from IDRs is formatted when REVIEWing associated CESD
     blocks (when scrolled right past the block itself) and when
     REVIEWING the IDRs themselves.  Translation and User IDRs
     are each a single logical record which can be spanned over
     many physical records.  For these 2 types only the last entry
     is formatted so that for simple load modules with few CSECTS
     you do not have to scroll right much, if at all.  For load
     modules with many CSECTs it is best to view the CESDs to get
     translation and IDENTIFY details pertaining to each ESD.  This
     data comes from the IDRs located after the CESDs.  Therefore
     the data can only be displayed if scrolling down to these IDRs
     has occurred.  For simple load modules the first screenful is
     usually sufficient, while for the nucleus, for example, one has
     to scroll down hundreds of lines before scrolling up again to
     get the formatted data.  (Caching of records does not occur in
     pre-XA systems so only data from blocks on the screen can be
     formatted.)  Only one ESD per CESD record is formatted per
     page, so left/right scrolling across a 15-page area is required
     to see all formatted ESDs in a many-CSECTed program (because
     a CESD can have data about up to 15 ESDs).  (Individual ZAP
     IDR entries are formatted 2 to a page, and also use left/right
     scrolling to access different entries.)  R29.9 fixes a logic
     error formatting IDR data for ESD entries.  After the screen
     records were processed the last screen record was processed
     again from cache, upsetting the assembly of the logical record.
     A design capacity limitation is still evident when looking at
     a couple of programs from SYS1.LINKLIB (such as ARCCTL) causing
     display errors when many (hundreds) CSECTs were compiled in the
     same compilation run.  This is not a problem for the nucleus.
     The link edit IDR is a fixed-length fixed-format record formatted
     by REVIEW.  OW29593 adds 4 bytes (the time in packed decimal) to
     it.  R29.9 should now format this IDR layout also.  Since the
     binder "name" is in plain text, the name will be replaced by the
     HH:MM:SS of the bind when the data of this extended IDR is broken
     out.
R29.9 should also fix a couple of bugs in formatting IMS details.
Personally, I blame bitrot to code not tested in 10 years.

R30.0 adds "jump from leader dots" where a member can be selected
by placing the cursor on a member list dot without actually typing
the S member selection code.  A VTOC can now be REVIEWed by specifying
the quoted data set name 'FORMAT4.DSCB' and supplying a volume serial
number with the VOLUME operand.  While REVIEWing a VTOC the format-1
DSCBs can be formatted with the FORMAT ON subcommand.  Support for the
logical PARMLIB service of OS/390 1.2 (and later) is accessed by a
request to REVIEW the PARMLIB file when no PARMLIB file is allocated.
(ie. REV PARMLIB F)

R30.1 fixes a bug where issuing a command RECALL on a wide screen
caused all data except the recalled command to be cleared from the
screen.  This was caused by calculating the buffer start address
for the wide screen, but leaving the end address for an 80-column
screen.  This made the end address less than the start address, so
an attempt to clear the primary input area cleared to the end of the
screen and wrapped around to clear the top of the screen.

R30.2 fixes a S0C4 abend caused by an incorrect attempt to restore
the primary command in the TSO ECT after a HELP session had ended.
This was most obvious on recursive HELPs with missing HELP data.

R30.3 fixes recursive REVIEW prompting problems by turning off
fullscreen mode, thus allowing line mode replies to prompts.
The STTMPMD macros were commented out to allow the receiving of
messages while in REVIEW under OS/390 2.4.  These can now be
reactivated for later releases, but probably only have an effect
if TSO/E Session Manager is used.  One user complained that the
directory area wasn't big enough for a specific PDS so it has been
increased from 512K to 768K.  The "cocktail-shaker" improvement to
bubble sort was added for some fixed-offset sorts for PDS directory
sorting to provide some modest but perceptible sort time reductions.

R31.0 provides PDS facilities accessible from the directory display
screen.
=SETFILE allows the setting of the output DDname, so it can
be changed from SYSUT2.  (This has no effect on the CUT and ADD
subcommands of "REVIEW-proper".)
=DELINK can now be used to invoke DELINKI to delink load modules.
=OFFLOAD can now offload load modules to fixed-length 80-byte records.
=PDSLOAD can invoke REVLMOD or PDSLOAD (depending on PDS RECFM) to
reload offloaded members.
=HELP screen split into 2 screens.
REVSMF no longer link-edited into REVIEW.  REVSMF made RMODE=ANY.

R32.0 adds ZIP and PCX file handling.  ZIP directories can be formatted
if the ZIP file is a DASD sequential file.  ASEXZIPD from ASE can be
invoked to unzip data.  <http://www.ase.com.au>  Unzipped data can be
REVIEWed and CUT to an output file.  1-bit, 4-bit and 8-bit single-plane
Paintbrush (ZSoft's PCX file format) can be rendered on a 3270 graphics
TSO terminal.  Character (raster) graphics done by REVIEW.  GDDM called
for vector graphics terminals.  (GDDM base now part of OS/390.  Put the
SADMMOD data set in the linklist.)  PICDATA allows the porting of a
picture into other Assembler 3270 applications.  DIV improved a bit for
ZIP file data handling - previously overhead increased exponentially
with record number.  (DIV here is REVIEW's internal record caching.)

R32.1 fixes IMS ACBLIB offset bugs and adds Y2K windowing for IMS
ACBLIBs which only use 3 bytes (YYDDDF) for the date.

R32.2 fixes 'PDSE' literal overlaying RMODE=24 program size total,
and using the wrong register to branch after a zip file error.
Recognition of low-level qualifiers now handles mixed case.

R32.3 handles 8K and 16K DB2 pages sizes.

R33.0 adds the 'H' member selection code to show program history.
For PDS load modules this is the same as 'S' and scrolling right.
For PDSE program objects IEWBFDAT is invoked and the results
(as opposed to the actual member contents) are REVIEWed.

R34.0 replicates nearly all of the PDS facilities for HFS files
including REVIEW/EDIT/BROWSE, global SEARCH, program history,
directory SORT, and entry tagging.  ZIP files are recognised if they
are HFS files.  HFS PCX files are recognised.  (NULL) is now not
shown for zero-length records unless HEX or FMT is on.  LRECL=X
is now supported up to 65535 bytes long.  DB2 rows are now only
extracted when the first page is recognised as a header page, and then
any page size should now be handled correctly (assuming it is a
multiple of 4K).  The slash ('/') selection code was added (for HFS
and PDS/PDSE) to allow the "specification" of the DATA operand at the
member or HFS file level.  '/' can be used to inhibit the default
processing of ZIP and PCX files.  HFS explorer like navigation is
done by selecting a subdirectory to make the current directory, or
PF3 up to parent directory.  PF3 from Root ends REVIEW.  Example:
   REVIEW /etc/dce  QUICK
BUT no operands are allowed so REVIEW attempts to show directory
'/etc/dce  QUICK/' which gets a RC=00000081 RSN=055E0072 because
it doesn't exist.  So, PF3 which REVIEWs directory '/etc/' with
the display positioned to 'dce'.  <NEWLINE> and <ENTER> selects
the 'dce' subdirectory so REVIEW now shows '/etc/dce/'.

R34.1 fixes the S0C9 abend when the 'SMF' command is issued.


REVIEW has several built-in formats which are pre-coded examples of
the general DSECT formatting capability.

**VTOC** - formats DSCB-1 records.  (DS1SMSFG improved with R34.0).
           Activate with FMT (or FMT ON) when REVIEWing a VTOC.

*DB2TBL* - shows full Row-ID (RID) of extracted DB2 rows.
           Automatically activated.

*ZIPFILE - formats ZIP central directory records.
           Automatically activated.

*OBJHIST - formats data extracted by REVIEW from Binder API calls.
           Automatically activated.


"Normal" REVIEWing of data is performed by the REVIEW2 CSECT.
This operates in 24-bit addressing mode, unless an HFS file is being
REVIEWed, whereupon REVIEW2 receives control from REVHFS in 31-bit
addressing mode.  All USS calls are done with AMODE=31.  REVHFS
provides routines for READ, CHECK, NOTE and POINT which are pointed
to by a fake DCB which is used by the standard BSAM macros in REVIEW2.
All Binder dialogs (Fast Data Access for PDSEs; full API for HFS)
take place with AMODE=31.  ISPLINK is invoked with AMODE=31 for HFS
files, and AMODE=24 for PDS/PDSE members.  GDDM is called with AMODE=31.


R35.0 provides another replication of directory processing, this time
for unconcatenated PDSE program object data sets.  The REVIEW CSECT
passes control to REVPDSE instead of REVPODIR when a single PDSE with
RECFM=U is being REVIEWed.  REVPDSE checks that it is a program object
library - if not control is transferred to REVPODIR.  If it is REVPDSE
performs all directory, formatting and command handling.  Why this
duplication?  Because REVPDSE (actually cloned from REVHFDIR) can
display long alias names, as well as program object-only attributes
which can be accessed by DESERV like date/time/job, Program Management
version, DLL enablement, etc.  Because REVPDSE only processes program
object libraries a few "normal" facilities are not available, such as
delinking, offloading and edit.  And because there are no output
facilities there is no =SETFILE command.  Each of the three directory
processors (REVPODIR, REVHFDIR and REVPDSE) has its own set of help
panels accessed with '=?' or '=HELP'.  REVPODIR was designed to fit
details from as many members as possible into its internal storage,
and would require a rewrite to handle long member names.  REVPODIR
has several entry formats for use with different member types.
REVHFDIR and REVPDSE have fixed-format internal entries with a
variable-length name at the end.  REVHFDIR acquires 128K (with LOC=ANY)
which is retained until the end of the REVIEW session.  REVPODIR and
REVPDSE acquire from 8K to 768K (variable GETMAIN) below the line.
After the directory has been read unused space is freed.  As a result,
for REVPODIR and REVPDSE an =REFRESH causes the whole area to be freed,
reacquired, and excess freed (so there is room for any new members).
When a long member name (which must therefore be an alias) is selected
for REVIEW or BROWSE, the real member name (maximum 8 bytes long) is
passed to REVIEW2 or ISPF, as appropriate.

DESERV code is executed with AMODE=31 for access to GET_ALL buffers
returned above the line.  The RMODE=24 program size total on the END
line of the member list only includes RMODE=24 segments of program
objects with more than one segment.  (I believe "more than one" means
"two".  That is, I don't think a program can have more than two
segments (currently).)

On a OS/390 2.7 system with DFSMS 1.5, pointing SYSLMOD to a PDSE
yields a PM3 object.  Copying a load module to a PDSE yields a PM1
object.  When copying to a PDS with ISPF option 3.3 copy the real
member first, then its aliases (without leaving the member list) to
avoid orphan aliases.  When copying to a PDSE, select the real member
AND all its aliases BEFORE pressing ENTER.

REVSRCH was given a parameter list so it does not have to be aware of
the working storage structure of REVPODIR and REVPDSE.  REVHFDIR does
not use the parameter list because it drives the searching of HFS files.
When called from REVPDSE, REVSRCH always uses the real member name, but
for PDSEs the results are the same (because PDSEs cannot have orphan
aliases).

REVIEW is 20 years old this month (19 Jan 2001).  Happy Birthday!

       And thank you, Bill, for writing it.


R36.0 adds things in these areas:                         2002-January
(1) TSO command management;
(2) memory management.
(3) parallel sessions;
(4) ISPF dialog;
(5) UNIX file symbolic links.

(1) TSO command feedback is improved by reporting any non-zero return
code or abend code in the top line message after the command has ended.
Also, for systems without TSO/E, the TSO command is invoked by ATTACH
with SZERO=NO to insulate REVIEW from abends by the TSO command, and to
avoid abends when the TSO command does not restore registers properly.
This is mainly aimed at MVS 3.8 systems because TSOEXEC (supplied by
TSO/E) already provides this protection.

(2) SZERO=NO has been added to all ATTACH calls by REVIEW subroutines to
maximise memory clean-up by the system after a utility has been called.
FREEPOOL macros have been added after all QSAM CLOSE macros.  This has
been done to conserve region storage which can be exhausted by several
recursive REVIEW sessions, mainly observed on 3.8.

(3) The SWAP command has been added.  This transforms nested REVIEW
sessions started by TSO REV or FSH commands inside REVIEW/FSHELP into
parallel sessions.  This makes the sessions accessible without the need
to terminate more recent sessions.  SWAP LIST can be used to list the
accessible sessions.  This SWAP processing has nothing to do with
the SWAP of ISPF.

(4) In some cases, REVIEW can be run as an ISPF application.  The
significant work of adding dialog support to the directory displays
has not been done, so only files without directories can be REVIEWed
in an ISPF display.  So, PDSs, PDSEs, HFS files and partitioned
subsystem data sets are excluded.  DSORG=PS,IS,DA,VS data sets can
have their data shown by REVIEW in an ISPF display.  ISPF split screen
processing is then available, and ISPF handles the TSO subcommand.

Prerequistes:  1. Install REVPANEL to ISPPLIB.
               2. Install REVPROF to ISPPROF.
               3. Run on MVS/ESA or later.

Separate from the REVIEW ISPF dialog aspect, other changes are:

(a) When the OS is OS/390 2.10 or later REVIEW will use the new ISPF
variables to access the data set name under the cursor for "point and
shoot" invocations rather than relying on ISPF's internal structure
to find the screen image and cursor location.  This has the added
benefit of not requiring the MODE(FSCR specification.

(b) Also under OS/390 2.10 or later in an ISPF environment REVIEW will
access ISPF variables to determine extended colour, highlighting and
graphic escape support instead of issuing a Read Partition (Query)
to the terminal.  This means (i) that REVIEW will initialize faster,
and (ii) REVIEW will not render Paintbrush pictures.

REVIEW now has an 'XISPMODE' (or 'X' for short) operand which causes
REVIEW to revert to pre-R36.0 behaviour in terms of data display
(ISPF will not be used) and determining screen attributes (a Query
will be performed if appropriate, thus making available any graphics
capabilities which would allow the rendering of picture images).

(5) When looking at UNIX directories, if the directory entry is a
symbolic link then the link value is shown in green.  This should
assist UNIX file administration because it can now be seen which files
are "real" and which are accessed via symbolic substitution.


R36.1, R36.2, R36.3 and R36.4 were small bug fixes in the main.

R36.5 changes ZIP directory formatting to handle 10 decimal digits for
the compressed and uncompressed file sizes, which is the required
number of digits to report any value of an unsigned fullword.

R36.5 also adds the 'A' selection code for UNIX files, which instructs
REVIEW to treat the selected file as an ASCII text file.  Not only is
ASCII-to-EBCDIC translation activated, but the end of line trigger
is changed from the EBCDIC New Line (NL=x'15') to the ASCII Line Feed
(LF=x'0A').  If the LF is immediately preceded by a carriage return
(CR=x'0D') then it is also not shown in the display.

R36.6 fixes subsystem allocation which was probably broken years ago
when support was added to REVIEW VTOCs when the data set name of
'FORMAT4.DSCB' was specified.  Bug reported by David Welles.

R36.7 fixes IKT00405I SCREEN ERASURE CAUSED BY ERROR RECOVERY PROCEDURE
after an ISPF Edit or Browse changes the screen to a smaller size
and then REVIEW tries to write data to the larger size.  Bug reported
by Mark Zelden who also reported a bug in REVSMF when formatting SMF
type 250 (TSOMON) records: an S0C4 in REVSMF would occur because the
target of an MVC instruction loading a literal used R7 as the base
instead of R6.


R37 notes

R37.0 implements a major internal reoganisation.          2003-October

Much of the triplicated code from the directory handlers has been unified
into commonly callable routines.  Several facilities only available while in
in "REVIEW data mode" are now available from directory displays as well.
Examples of such facilities include the TSO and SWAP commands, the ability
to set PFK values, and the ability to run as an ISPF dialog.

The list of CSECTs making up the REVIEW command processor are:

REVIEW   - entry point to perform parsing and initialisation.
REVIEW2  - main "browse file data" processor.
REVPCL   - REVIEW TSO parsing parameters.
HELPCL   - FSHELP TSO parsing parameters.
REVPDS   - formerly REVPODIR - format, display and navigate PDS directories.
REVSORTE - PDS directory sort enhancer.
REVALCO  - allocate and serialize sequential output file.
REVDALO  - free and deq sequential output file.
REVOFFLD - sequentialize PDS members.
REVSRCH  - search PDS members for data.
REVISPF  - invoke ISPF Edit, Browse or View functions.
REVLOAD  - invoke PDSLOAD or REVLMOD to load new PDS members.
REVDLNK  - invoke DELINKI to delink load modules.
REVDIV   - cache reviewed data in virtual storage.
REVPNS   - determine point-and-shoot data set name.
REVHIST  - invoke Binder to show program history.
REVIMAGE - show picture using raster graphics.
REVGDDM  - show picture using vector graphics.
REVUNIX  - formerly REVHFDIR - format, display and navigate UNIX directories,
           manage UNIX file search, and set up for UNIX data REVIEW.
REVPDSE  - format, display and navigate PDSE program library directory.
REVHEAD  - clear screen buffer and initialize common first 2 lines.
REVCOMM  - perform all TSO terminal communication using ISPF or TPUT/TGET.
REVMSGS  - house and retrieve common fullscreen messages.

FINDHEX, FINDCHR and FINDPIC (and their respective FINDNOT commands) have
been dispensed with in favour of specifying the search argument in an
ISPF-like manner.

FIND and FINDNOT can now have a search column range specified, as well as
one of the PREFIX, SUFFIX and WORD keywords specified.

PDS(E) and UNIX files-in-a-directory SEARCH can exploit the new FIND options.

VIEW has been added to the EDIT and BROWSE repetoire for invoking ISPF services.

REVLMOD has been enhanced to use linkage editor serialisation
(QNAME=SYSIEWLP) when updating load libraries to improve data integrity.

REVIEW has been enhanced to use ISPF serialisation (QNAME=SPFEDIT) when
updating sequential or partitioned data sets.

Directory display subcommands no longer have the '=' prefix, and primary
input text is no longer interpreted as a LOCATE request specification.

Directory displays no longer have a separate set of PFK values hard-coded.
A SORT command is available to request the sorting of directory entries.

Some commands such as TSO, =X, KEYS and HELP will behave differently when
REVIEW is running as an ISPF dialog because these commands will be
processed by ISPF.


R38 notes

R38.0 implements REVEDIT - the REVIEW Editor.             2004-May

The REVEDIT CSECT has been added to supply an editor for PDS members
and sequential data sets.  The 'U' member selection code and the
'UPDATE' primary command will invoke REVEDIT, as will the 'E' member
selection code and the 'EDIT' primary command when REVIEW is not
running in an ISPF environment.  Various other bug fixes are also
included.

The TSO HELP now has several members.  REVEDIT has its own HELP member
as does each of the three directory displays.  John Kalinich has kindly
coded up numerous ISPF tutorial panels which can be displayed when a
HELP command is processed by ISPF.

This release also sees the introduction of the REVGEN source member
which sets the values of switches used during conditional assembley.
With the appropriate settings in REVGEN, REVIEW can be assembled on
MVS 3.8 using the Tachyon Legacy Assembler and the SYS1.MACLIB and
SYS1.AMODGEN macro libraries from that MVS.

See http://www.tachyonsoft.com/ for the Tachyon Assembler.
Macros for BASSM and BSM are required under MVS 3.8 to assemble REVIEW.

REVEDIT can use a data space to hold data while it is being edited.
A data space can grow to 2GB subject to customisation by IEFUSI.
REVGEN can be set so that REVEDIT will use the user region to hold
the data - obviously a necessity for MVS 3.8 and other pre-ESA systems.

R38.1 fixes a few bugs such as REVIEW accessing new extents after
an UPDATE increased the size of the data set, REVEDIT SAVE handling
erased sequence numbers, and ERR being a valid abbreviation for
ERROR on a REVEDIT LOCATE command.  Other changes include the removal
of the DDname operand of CUT and APPEND in favour of presenting a
panel to specify a data set name, and the addition of the COPY command
in REVEDIT.  A "point-and-shoot" REVIEW also now works when triggered
from a REVEDIT session.

R38.2 fixes a few bugs such as an S0C4 when initializing as an ISPF
application under SDSF, and fixing the home location of the cursor on
screens with more than 80 columns.  A member list sort can now be
triggered by placing the cursor on a column heading (as suggested by
John K.) - eligible headings have underscores.  The effective uid will
be set to 0 (superuser), RACF permitting, to improve access by REVIEW to
directories and files (as suggested by Mark Zelden).  The original
effective uid is restored by the time any ISPF services are invoked.
REVPANEL now has extra attribute codes to allow the display of data
with GE(ON) explicitly requested.

R38.3 fixes the problem where a cursor-triggered member sort did not
occur when the end of the member list was on the screen.  Also, the
Binder API processing was cosmetically changed during diagnosis for
problems reported in IBM APARs OA08880 (ABEND0C4) and OA09299 (RC8
REASON CODE 1080003A) which are relevant for z/OS 1.5 and 1.6.
Thanks to Mark Zelden for detecting and reporting the bugs to IBM.

R38.4 fixes an S0C4 abend after VSAM OPEN failure - now the return
and reason codes are displayed properly as before - must have been
bitrot in a recent release.

R38.5 fixes two problems with REVEDIT:
- an intermittent S0C4 processing line commands.
- unreliable matching by FIND when PREFIX, SUFFIX or WORD is specified,
  especially when ALL is also specified.

R38.6 fixes an S0C4 when the editor initialises after data was found
in the browser.


R39 notes

R39.0 implements syntax colouring for Assembler and JCL.  2004-December

The 'HILITE' (or 'HI') REVEDIT subcommand has been added to control
whether syntax highlighting is to be activated or not.  The HILITE
setting is saved in the profile if one exists.

The 'UPDATE' (or 'UPD') operand of 'LOCATE' has been added so that
lines updated in the current edit session can be located.  This operand
(unlike the other non-numeric operands of LOCATE) is not compatible
with ISPF's Edit.

R39.1 fixes an S0C4 when HEX ON is used with records which do not reach
the end of the screen line - the terminating attribute byte code was
being moved into the edited data array corrupting a pointer instead of
to the screen buffer.  Bug reported by John H. Keith.

R39.2 makes improvements to PDS-member/UNIX-file searches performed
from directory entry list displays.

Firstly, the standard PDS directory display now can perform searches
for lowercase strings - this was just a plain bug.

Secondly, another bug where the picture attribute of the search was
not reset for a non-picture search after a picture search is fixed.

And thirdly, non-picture case-insensitive searches have been sped up
to (practically) match the performance of non-picture case-sensitive
searches.  This is achieved by the simple expedient of translating
the whole record to uppercase once after it is read instead of for
each compare, thus making simple compares adequate to find the data.
Note that this does not speed up normal FIND command processing as the
data must be kept untranslated for display and other processing.

R39.3 changes behaviour/output as follows:
- EREP formatting will display the STCK value in hex if the system
  does not have the STCKCONV facility (ie. is pre-SP4), and system
  abend code digits have been reduced from 4 to 3.  Also, garbage
  will no longer be left in column 81.
- Fix intermittent incorrect numeric data such as VV.MM when showing
  member details - this occurred for some members and not others when
  shown on some screen lines but not others.
- A new 'M' selection code is implemented to display a module map
  for program objects (both PDSE and UNIX, but not PDS).  (The *OBJMAP*
  and *OBJESD* internal formats are used to display the results.)
- REVEDIT will no longer loop (or perhaps abend) when an I line command
  is on the screen while a move/copy is pending, and autoinsert will no
  longer occur if the cursor is in the line number field of the line.

Since the demise of JCC the MINIZIP and MINIUNZ load modules are now
included in the executable program library.

R39.4 adds support for VSAM Extended Addressable access, although
REVIEW only supports up to 1TB with this change.  Also, RLS=NRI is
now specified internally to maximize access to data controlled by RLS.


R40 notes

R40.0 implements REVED and REVOUT.                        2006-April

REVED is simply an alias of REVIEW to initiate the edit of a sequential
data set (instead of having to browse it with REVIEW and issue the EDIT
or UPDATE primary command).  The other main difference of REVED is that
the meaning of the 'S' selection code for PDS members is to request the
member be edited with REVEDIT instead of being browsed with REVIEW.

REVOUT provides a fullscreen interface to TSO FIB commands so that they
can be used to give QUEUE-like or SDSF-like access to job output that
is independent of the level of MVS and Job Entry Subsystem in use.
Function depends on the SYSOUTTRAP facility and uses the CLIST called
REVOUTJB which should be installed into SYSPROC.

MVS 3.8 users who wish to use REVOUT may be interested in usermods from
http://www.prycroft6.com.au/vs2mods which add CLIST function including
SYSOUTTRAP (ZP60014), and which alter JES2 (ZP60015) and TSO STATUS
(ZP60016) so that the TSO STATUS command without any operand returns
the status of all jobs with names of the TSO user's id plus zero, one,
two and three extra characters (up to a maximum length of eight).  A
JES3 version of the ZP60015 usermod would be needed to provide similar
function in a JES3 environment.

This release also rolls up bug fixes originally intended for R39.5,
most notably those debugged by Steven Becquer of Miami-Dade County
Public Schools I.T.S.

CSECTs for PDSEs and UNIX have been moved from the REVSUBS source
member to a new REVSUBS2 source member.

REVALCO (which is called for SEQLOAD and OFFLOAD from the member list,
and CUT and APPEND from data REVIEW) has been changed such that if
the specified output data set name cannot be found it will be created.
It will be a sequential data set if no member name was supplied, or
a PDS with 20 directory blocks if a member name was supplied.  In most
cases the new data set's DCB will match that of the data set being
REVIEWed.

R40.1 changes:
- correct DMB size count for IMS V6 and V7.
- ignore DATA operand for REVED command (do not edit PDS directory).
- prevent S0C4 abend of REVOUT if REVOUTJB CLIST is not installed.

R40.2 changes:
- display found data hidden by ISPF split screen.
- general fixes to scrolling.



R41 notes

R41.0 rolls up changes from 40.3 onwards.                 2007-November

Apart from bug fixes, the main changes include:
- show step name and CPU time of active jobs in REVOUT.
- extract pictures from most types of uncompressed Windows/OS2 bitmaps.
- use native 3270 vector graphics when available to show pictures.
- session id numbers are now fixed and not relative to current screen.
- current session id shown as blue superscript if session is nested.
- cursor position saved and restored across SWAP commands.
- make Edit the default selection action for the REVED command.
- generate cursor autoselect 'S' only if no primary command.
- improve TSO logic to not finish calling CLIST after subcommand CLIST.
- suppress screen size switch if screen size already has 80 columns.
- use PDS member DIV caching now only of RECFM=U - the main purpose
  is to allow CESD formatting show IDR details - now also for pre-XA.

R41.0 enhancements to REVEDIT include:
- add TF and TS line commands.
- add SORT primary command.
- add CREATE and REPLACE primary commands.
- colon command prefix applies command to current line. eg. :TS
- support ASM highlighting of source code in a jobstream.

R41.0 enhancements for MVS 3.8 also include:

REVSMF can now format data from MF/1 records (types 70->74).
Of the SMF records produced by MVS 3.8, only types 73 and 74
from MF/1 seem to be sensitive to left/right scrolling.

As of R41.0 REVIEW will override the LRECL of SYS1.MANX and
SYS1.MANY of one thousand with ten thousand because MF/1 can write
records longer than one thousand bytes.  REVIEW will continue
to override the blocksize of SYS1.LOGREC of 40 with 1944.


R41.1 changes REVEDIT to avoid S0C4 abend after a TF line command
in ESA (data space) mode, and also adds minor improvements to
JCL syntax highlighting.


R41.2 fixes some things serious (like S0C4 moving lines to before the
current top of screen) and not so serious (like the new members added
by a PDSLOAD into an empty PDS can be seen without having to scroll
up), and also adds some features.

REVEDIT can now be invoked in VIEW mode (where data set serialization
is not performed and SAVE is disabled) and REVEDIT also now supports
UNDO and REDO by employing a recovery data set called
prefix.REVEDIT#.BACKUP where # is the screen number.

Note that recovery is manual, but can be performed by REVIEWing the
recovery data set, using NEWTOP to access deleted members if the
existing member is corrupt - not that it should be, using CUT to
copy the records to a new data set, and editing the new data set
and shifting all data to the left to restore proper data alignment.

The recovery data set should be deleted to re-enable UNDO/REDO
(and recovery) for that screen session number.

UNDO OFF is available to stop undo/recovery processing if you find
it is adding too much to response time.  And then there is UNDO ON
for when you find that the overhead isn't so bad after all.


R41.3 fixes an error where the editor tries to move 8 bytes into 4 bytes
when only 4 were needed.  Because it was at the end of a page (most of
the time) the result could be harmless, a mysterious storage overlay,
or an S0C4 abend.


R41.4 fixes an S0C4 abend encountered after an UNDO was requested and
the post-UNDO display position was not Top-of-Data (as in UP MAX).
(If the post-UNDO display position was line zero there was no problem.)

A check of the ISPF panel dynamic area size during initialization
(testing that it matched expected results based on the screen size)
has been removed in the hope that this allows more ISPF application
REVIEW sessions on wide screens.


R41.5 fixes several basic bugs.  When a block was excluded which
incorporated the current top display line REVEDIT lost track of, well,
reality, so things like line numbers became corrupt.  LOCATE by line
number was fixed as it was just plain wrong with excluded lines
because it invoked UP or DOWN scrolling which count display lines, not
data records.

As well as OFF, JCL, ASM and AUTO, now PLI, CLIST and DATA are valid
operands of HILITE or HI.  Slash-asterisk ... asterisk-slash comments
are now highlighted as such, PL/I column 1 and pre-processor statements
are shown in blue, and Assembler labels can now have non-trailing
ampersands in other than the first position not flagged as an error.

A leading *PROCESS statement with a semicolon is taken to indicate
PL/I source, while one without a semicolon is taken to indicate
Assembler source.  MAR or MARGINS is not yet parsed.

JCL validation has been extended in some areas.  The REGION parameter
on EXEC and JOB statements is validated mainly to detect post-XA
values on pre-XA systems.

For JCL DD statements, plain data set names are validated and
underscored if cataloged and shown in blue if not cataloged.  If a
single volume is specified without parentheses it is length-checked,
and for MVS/370 systems an attempt is made to see if it is an online
DASD volume.  If it is online it is underscored, and its generic
device type designation is shown in that line's command area at the
left of the screen.

There is no cross-checking with the catalog entry vs VOL=SER in the JCL,
nor with the volume device type vs the UNIT value in the JCL.


R41.6 changes include:
- REVEDIT backup file now uses the userid as the high-level qualifier
when PROFILE NOPREFIX is in effect.  (Reported/suggested by Sam K.)
- Screen size now set from ISPF panel size.  (Reported by John K.)
- REVOUT will now display some rudimentry Assembler syntax highlighting
when showing Assembler listings.  (Requested by Tom Armstong.)
- Program object PDSE directory display now
  - has more SORT types (idea by Charles MacNiven).
  - shows PM sublevel in superscript (or lower case if ever over 9).
- Done some work on implementing an INFO subcommand.


R41.7 fixes operation as an ISPF application broken when trying to
handle the case when the line mode screen size (as returned by STSIZE)
is different from the fullscreen screen size (as reflected in the
dimensions of the ISPF panel).  The undocumented global subcommand
of 'CDE' or 'JPA' has been added.


R41.8 fixes:
- REVOUT Assembler listing syntax highlighting for wide screen.
- REVEDIT CREATE/REPLACE creating corrupt SPF statistics.
- REVEDIT CREATE/REPLACE RECFM=V not copying first selected record.
- screen size not switching for pre-coded 80-column displays.
- UNZIP temp unit of 3380 - now 3390 followed by SYSALLDA for retry.
  (It was VIO originally, but large zips could cause auxiliary
  storage shortages on under-configured pre-SMS systems.)


R41.9 fixes:
- 'CHANGE ALL' missed occurrences of the FIND string after syntax
  highlighting housekeeping used the dynamic translate table work
  area thus overlaying the TRT table used by CHANGE.
- REVHIST setup for PDSEs just checked that DIV was initialized
  (as it used to be not so long ago) and if it wasn't issued the
  '"REVIEW" internal storage exhausted' message.  Now REVHIST
  will issue the DIV GETMAIN call for PDSEs as it does for UNIX.



R42 notes

R42.0 adds support for DSNTYPE=LARGE data sets.           2008-September


R42.1 changes:
- Fix locating a ZIP archive's central directory for DSNTYPE=LARGE.
- Add the 'RTF' subcommand to output coloured print files in RTF
  format.
- Enhance Assembler listing syntax highlighting to show literals in
  white as REVEDIT syntax highlighting does.
- Add the 'D' PDS member selection code so that members can be deleted
  from the PDS member selection display such that they can be restored
  with an 'R' selection.  This is only supported for unconcatenated
  PDSs and not PDSEs (because the restore does not work for PDSEs).
- Enhance the 'R' PDS member selection code to restore members
  deleted with a 'D'.
- Fix various cosmetic glitches.
- Fix PDSE 'H' errors caused by erroneous DIV processing.
- Various internal reorganizational changes such as moving the RECALL
  stack from the @DATA area and placing it into an area which is
  shared by all parallel sessions, and removing the code to transfer
  the RECALL stack ownership during logical screen SWAP processing.
  Another example is suppressing DIV processing during searches of
  program libraries - no point caching data for a single scan - which
  was sometimes a source of abends during such searches.
- Add the undocumented 'TCB' (alias 'RB') command.


R42.2 changes:
- Highlight PL/I source code in editor according to character code
  points, and report unbalanced parentheses as syntax errors.
- Allow REVOUT to run as an ISPF application.


R42.3 changes:
- Add the 'SCRNAME' command to assign a new name to the logical
  screen session.
- The optional operand of the 'SWAP' subcommand can now be 'NEXT',
  'PREV' or a session name, in addition to 'LIST' or a session id
  (decimal number) that were previously allowed.
- The default value of PF9 is changed from 'SWAP' to 'SWAP NEXT'.
- An attempt is made to name logical screen sessions automatically.
  Names used are OUT (for REVOUT), HELP (for FSHELP) and the last
  data set name qualifier (if fewer than three qualifiers exist)
  or the second-last data set name qualifier (if more than two
  qualifiers exist).  Names shorter than eight characters will have a
  digit (2 - 9) appended to prevent duplicate session names.  A name
  will be left blank rather than creating a duplicate non-blank name.
- The concurrent or parallel session count limit is increased
  from 8 to 16.
- Add the 'N' PDS member selection code which allows a new name
  to be assigned to an unconcatenated PDS or data PDSE member.
  The user is prompted to supply the new name when the selection
  code is processed.  Member names containing commas, imbedded
  blanks, or code points less than a blank are rejected (message
  will just say REQUEST CANCELLED).  The 26 English letters will
  be folded to upper case.  Apart from these restrictions any
  other code point you can type in will be used as supplied in the
  new member name.  Null or blank input, or input entered with a
  key other than the <enter> key will also cause the request to be
  cancelled.
- Fix to serialization bug (not supplying the data set name to ENQ
  correctly)  which allowed a member to be deleted, restored or
  renamed while it was being edited.
- REVEDIT (Edit and View) is changed to show the search match that
  the cursor has been positioned to in reverse video, as is done
  by REVIEW (Browse).
- The PL/I source margins columns are extracted from the 'SORMGIN',
  'MAR' or 'MARGINS' settings from leading '*PROCESS' and '%PROCESS'
  statements for syntax highlighting purposes.



R43 notes

R43.0 introduces RFE - the "REVIEW Front End".            2010-March

RFE is a menu framework to allow navigation to the various components
of the package.  The initial menu options are:
D - "REVLEV" - the data set list utility which is a bit "3.4-ish".
O - "REVOUT" - to access spooled output which is a bit
               "QUEUE meets 3.8-ish".
T - "REVTSO" - which is a bit "6-ish".
This may change to a numerical scheme later if enough other options
materialize.

To assist RFE operations, the default for PFK2 is now 'SPLIT' which is
a new global subcommand equivalent to 'TSO RFE'.  Note that an initial
RFE option can be specified as an operand of 'SPLIT'.

Architecturally, this release sees all BSM and BASSM instructions
removed from the package.  All code is now intended to run in the
31-bit addressing mode under z/OS, although the code has yet to be
compiled and tested under z/OS at the time of writing.

RFE is mainly to aid use under MVS/370, and so the 370 version is
being released first.

The source for the main load module has increased from 49.3 KLOC to
57.8 KLOC.  As well as new CSECTs delivering new function, a few
fixes were also implemented, including:
- Add EADSCB=OK settings.
- Reactivate DIV PDS member data caching under FSHELP to stabilize
  scrolling when )I member inclusion is used.
- Add extended ISPF stats recognition (but not necessarily digestion).
- Preserve seconds in timestamp when processing ISPF stats.
- Recognize and handle ZIP archives in PDS members.
- When exiting from a REVIEW of a zipped file, scroll to place
  that file at the top of the zip directory display, instead of
  always reshowing the zip directory from the top, which was *very*
  annoying when a ZIP archive contains many screensful of file names.
- Fix "fastpath" which was broken and always reported I/O errors.
  It might have been broken by the DSNTYPE=LARGE support.
- Detect screen size change dynamically.  This is intended to support
  loss of a terminal and a LOGON RECONNECT using a terminal with
  different screen dimensions.
- Assume square brackets can be rendered natively with x'AD'/x'BD'.
- Improve STAX processing for MVS/370.
- Fix an intermittent S0C4 with REVEDIT line command blocks.
- Fix an S0C4 in REVEDIT with 'C * *' and new string never specified.
- Use userid as 2nd dsname qualifier for UNDO/REDO data set when
  the prefix is not equal to the userid.  This will stop other users
  with your prefix hogging your UNDO/REDO and CONDENSE data sets.
  (CONDENSE is used by the 'Z' action in REVLEV.)  And you can now tell
  which users are making such data sets under your high-level qualifier.
- Use Merge Sort instead of Bubble Sort for member name and TTR sorts,
  reducing an initial display of 'REV ISPPLIB F' from minutes in some
  cases to sub-second.  (Sorts of other member attributes still use
  Bubble Sort because the field to be sorted is not fixed.  REVLEV
  uses Merge Sort when sorting the data set name list.)
- Add repeated-symbol optimization for triple-plane symbol graphics.
- Upgrade the 'N' (member rename) action code dialog screen I/O.


R43.1 changes:
- Prevent QSAM I/O error during REVEDIT COPY from crashing off the
  whole REVIEW/RFE environment by adding EROPT=ACC to the DCB so
  that the abend is considered recoverable by the SYNAD exit.
- Add a member selection list for REVEDIT COPY from a PDS and no
  member name specified.  (This was the chief source of the QSAM I/O
  errors mentioned above.)
- Report MEMBER NOT FOUND instead of S013-18 for REVEDIT COPY from
  a PDS when the specified member is not present.
- Verify that the UNDO/REDO data set does not exist at the start
  of a REVEDIT session before allocating it.  If it does exist then
  report REVVEDIT#.BACKUP NOT REUSED (where # is the screen number)
  instead of DYNALLOC feedback codes.  It is up to the user to decide
  if the data in the pre-existing data set should be used for recovery.
  Any such recovery may well involve manually editing a copy of the
  recovery file member and shifting all of the data 12 columns to the
  left.
- Do similar for the CONDENSE data set, except that the message is
  ABORTED - CONDENSE FILE EXISTS.  It is up to the user to decide
  if the data in the pre-existing data set should be used for recovery.
  Any such recovery would probably involve using the REVLPDS program.
- Handle full DIV when loading data from REVCATCH - was getting S0C4.
  ("REVCATCH" refers to the way line mode TSO data is taken from
  SYSOUTTRAP and loaded into DIV for fullscreen scrollable browsing.
  Look at the REVLISTC CLIST to see an example.)


R43.2 fixes the UCB address acquisition from the TIOT which became
a bug with the 31-bit addressing conversion and which can cause an
S0C4 abend.


R43.3 fixes the display of prompting panels when running as an
ISPF application.


R43.4 completes the support necessary to process VTOCs on EAV
and data sets residing in EAS which have format-8 and format-9
DSCBs replacing the format-1 DSCB.


R43.5 fixes more AMODE-31 glitches and adds the data set name to
open file details in the display produced by the 'TCB'/'RB' command.
REVHIST has been rewritten to use the full Binder dialog API in all
cases, and is now called under z/OS for PDS load modules as well as
PDSE and HFS program objects.  **-RED ALERT-** Also fixed is the
REVEDIT data corruption of edited data by a CHANGE ALL command which
caused some data bytes to be overlaid with x'FF' when using a data
space to back the data.  Sessions on pre-ESA levels of MVS were not
affected.


R43.6 fixes a S0C4 abend when the 'OPERANDS' or 'MSGID' operand of
FSHELP was used.  This was exposed when running with AMODE=31.



R44 notes

R44.B rolls up changes from 43.6 onwards.                 2012-October
It is an MVS/370-only OCO beta or early release prior to GA.

Apart from bug fixes, the main changes include:
- A new 'SETUNZ' command to specify the file attributes, thereby
  overriding the information in the ZIP file directory entry.
- Changes to the way member lists scroll after member selection.
- Using PDS subcommands to produce displays for the 'H' and 'M'
  selection code processing of load modules (via the REVUSPDS CLIST).
- Adding the 'BOUNDS' primary command in REVEDIT.
- Show data in out-of-bounds columns in blue in REVEDIT.
- Adding the 'TE' line command for text entry in REVEDIT.
- Adding the 'CUT' and 'PASTE' primary commands to REVEDIT.
- Recovering from PDS directory I/O errors during INFO processing,
  which includes the data set Delete function in REVLEV (data set list).
- Adding the 'M' action code to REVLEV (data set list).
- Adding LEFT/RIGHT scrolling in REVLEV (data set list) so that all
  information columns can be viewed on insufficiently wide screens.

The 'BRVS' (or 'B' for short) undocumented operand has been added
to the REVIEW command.  Its use is intended to allow the browsing
of virtual storage. When specified, the required first positional
(data set name) operand is ignored.  The data is displayed under
the heading of ACTIVE, as per IPCS.  About all it is currently
good for is browsing the in-core MVS/370 nucleus.

The following z/OS-only fixes were introduced into the code base:
- For program PDSE directory displays, the member name operand of
  primary commands is now folded to upper case if there are no
  lower case characters in any of the member names.
- For UNIX directory displays, the entries read from a directory
  are now always sorted before display.  Previously, if the SORT
  order was "sort by name" no sorting was performed, which could
  lead to an out-of-order display depending on subdirectory MOUNT
  points, leading in turn to unexpected behaviour for LOCATE commands.
Actually, the term "z/OS-only" really means "MVS/ESA or later".


R44.0 is the first R44 GA release - with source code.     2014-January

REVIEW now incorporates a GIF decoder which adds GIF files to the
PCX and BMP file formats that can be decoded and displayed on 3270
graphics terminals.  Interlaced and animated GIFs are supported.
Only one cycle of the animation is currently shown.  NEWTOP can
be used to manually trigger another cycle.

When programmed symbols are used for graphics, REVIEW prefers to
load the code points into the internal screen buffer from which
the 3270 data stream is built.  This allows 3270 compression logic
to also be applied to graphics data, and reduces the number of
TPUTs issued.  This scheme does not work well when the pictures are
large enough to require more code points than all read/write
storages can provide.  The logic to build the 3270 data stream for
these large pictures has probably been broken in this release, but
hopefully it will be fixed in due course.

REVIEW 'ACTIVE'
will now cause the current contents of virtual storage in your TSO
session address space to be browsed.  EQUATE and DROP commands have
been added.  LEFT and RIGHT are repurposed in this mode to control
jumping through the storage address trace table.  LPA and JPA loaded
modules, as well as (under z/OS) nucleus control sections are
automatically defined as usable symbols.  LOC/LIST now understands
storage addresses specified much like as is done in TSO TEST.
The symbol name 'X' can be used for the current location, as per IPCS.
'%' and '?' can be used in the field preceding each storage word.
No support for "above the bar" storage currently exists.

The 'BRVS' operand mentioned above has been scrapped.

Browsing z/OS UNIX zip files is now supported.

Not mentioned under R43 above is the vertical scroll bar.
When not running as an ISPF application, and when the PDS member list
is more than a screenful, column 80 contains an indicator of the
vertical scroll location of the member list.

In response to a request, member scrolling is now a bit different.
Firstly, the member list scrolls less.  The cursor is placed beside
the member just processed, but that member's jump dot is blanked,
so <enter> will just restore the cursor to home.  This should mean
that all members will always be visible when they can all fit in
a single screenful.



R45 notes

Several MVS/370 ESP releases were issued in August and September 2014
with ESP6 being the last.

R45.0 (September 2014) rolls up the defects reported from Early
Support Program up to the GA date.

Changes include:
- Reorganization of profile member contents, so previous PFK
  defaults will be lost.
- Support for picture search when 'ASCII ON' is set.
- Explicitly check for and disallow a request to APPEND request to a
  PDS member.
- Issue RACROUTE for many non-VSAM data set accesses whenever MVS
  security is active.
- Assume access is denied when the RACROUTE return code is greater
  than 4.
- Add a new 'SB' subcommand which is the same as 'SUBMIT' but invokes
  the new REVSB CLIST to prevent line-mode terminal I/O.
- Support access to large PDSE members.
- Add START alias of SPLIT.
- Change PF2 default to START since SPLIT behaves like ISPF's START
  command.
- Reorganize RFE menu option numbering.  Options 1, 2, 3.1 and 3.2 now
  exist in addition to options 3.4, 3.8 and 6.
- Support leading ampersand in command to retain command string in
  input area.
- Reorganize REVPDS CSECT's internal handling of directory entries.
- Display position number on the top line of the REVPDS member list
  display.
- Various program restructuring to reduce duplicate code.
- Remember more RFE stuff in profile members, such as most recent
  "other data set" history.
- Add automated EDIT recovery in option 2.


R45.1 includes the following changes:
- Fix display of ISPF statistics when 32-bit record counters are used.
- Fix S0C4 abend which preceded freeing the VTOC of a volume DSLIST.
- Expand the "other data set" history list from 10 to 16, and reduce
  the displayed list size to the number of entries that will fit on
  the screen.  This fixes screen corruptions seen on 24-line screens.
- Include new data set attributes panel before 'CUT' creates a new data
  set. The data set name is pre-primed with the previous output data
  set name, if any.
- New logical/parallel sessions (from 'SPLIT' or 'START') will inherit
  the same screen size as existing logical sessions instead of using
  the size set by STSIZE which may have changed since RFE started.
- Output from REVIEW's 'CUT' command is now written using BSAM instead
  of QSAM to improve I/O error recovery - mainly by eliminating
  unrecoverable abends that can occur when CLOSE flushes QSAM buffers.
- Enhance REVIEW's 'CUT' processing to support F/V/U record formats.
- Add RFE option 3.3 which exploits REVIEW's 'CUT' logic.  Most things
  that REVIEW can browse can be copied, including VSAM and BDAM files.
  Record truncation is reported.  Truncating blanks from fixed-length
  records is not considered record truncation by RFE.  As a safety
  feature, copying members between undefined and defined record formats
  is not allowed, though it is for sequential data sets.  Alias members
  are copied as real members, except if the alias is an OS/VS program
  and its real name member already exists in the target library, in
  which case its contents are not copied but the alias is assigned
  (with the userdata copied from the source PDS) to the existing
  member - even if the existing member is not the same version as
  exists in the source PDS.  The pre-2010 ISPF option 3.3 copying
  convention should be observed:  select the real members for copying,
  then select the aliases.  Sorting the member list into TTR order
  before selecting the programs to copy may make the copying task
  simpler.  Note that using an asterisk to select all members is not
  currently supported.
- The size of available but unused MVS/370 region virtual storage pages
  is displayed in the lower right corner of the screen - the last 12
  bytes - if the last 13 bytes of the screen are all the same
  character and are not in an input field.  It is shown in blue unless
  less than 64KB in which case it is shown in yellow unless it is less
  than 32KB in which case it is shown in red reverse video.
- Fix S0C4 abend in REVEDIT when new insert line has text added and is
  immediately used as the first line of a block line command.
- Allow REVIEW 'ACTIVE' TOP(hexvalue) to specify the initial virtual
  storage display address.


R45.2 includes the following changes:
- Option 3.5 is added, providing some ability to set the version, level
  and user ID for members, as well as deleting and creating statistics
  for selected members.
- Option 3.3 now supports the specification of a "from" member name of
  an asterisk and takes it to request the copying of all "from" members.
- Option 3.3 alias member copy support has now been regularized to the
  pre-z/OS ISPF option 3.3 standard.  That is, if the alias's real
  member has not already been copied in this copy session then the
  alias is copied as a real member, but if the real member has already
  been copied then the alias is added without re-copying the member
  contents.  The real name stored in the userdata if alias programs
  is now no longer used by option 3.3 - but still be on the lookout
  for programs with ?? in the AC column because it probably means
  that an alias program was copied as a real member.
- Under R45.1, when copying selected members using option 3.3, the
  output DCB would be closed after each member was copied.  This meant
  that multiple type 15 SMF records were written, but since the same
  files (DD allocations) were used, the EXCP counts were cumulative.
  So, SMF post-processors adding up the EXCP counts would arrive at
  an inflated EXCP count.  Now for a PDS-to-PDS copy (whether selected
  members or all members) the input and output files go through a single
  OPEN/CLOSE cycle which results in unambiguous EXCP counts and fewer
  SMF records.
- The SAF Router logic of the RAKF ESM was found to not look at the
  offsets used by RACROUTE when constructing a SAF Router parameter
  list, so RACHECK is used under MVS/370 to perform data set access
  checks.  (The original pointers have flags in their high bytes
  while the newer pointers allow 31-bit addresses to be specified.)


R45.3 fixes MEMBER NOT FOUND conditions reported when browsing members
  after a REVEDIT OPEN (either View or Edit) does not succeed, such as
  when access is denied by the system's security component.


R45.4 includes the following changes:
- PFK settings saved in the $$REVIEW profile member will now be applied
  when REVIEW/RFE first starts up.  This has been broken since R45.0.
- Changes to $$REVIEW settings made in option 3.4 will no longer be
  discarded.
- Under MVS 3.8J with JES2, the JES2 checkpoint and SPOOL data sets will
  be accessed to give improved access to jobs in the various queues, and
  access to SYSOUT of jobs without held output.  Any job name filter
  beginning with an asterisk will cause all jobs to be listed.
- Option 3.3 now has additional settings to control whether existing
  members in the target PDS can be replaced or not, and whether the
  target sequential data set is to be extended or overwritten.
- Option 1 Browse will now show the status of the DATA setting even if
  it is OFF.  The purpose of this setting is to allow access to the DATA
  operand of REVIEW when browsing non-partitioned files.  For PDS
  members (and for UNIX files and for jobs in REVOUT aka option 3.8) use
  the 'S' selection code for default operation (no DATA operand) and use
  the '/' selection code to request the display of the raw data without
  any interpretation by REVIEW.


R45.5 fixes MVS/370 REVOUT function for MVS systems with a JES which
does not have x'02' in the SSCTSSID field.  This includes MVS systems
not running JES2, and those running JES2 without the TJES801 usermod
applied.  See:
http://www.j76.org/vs2/tjes801.txt


R45.6 fixes corruption to the recursion vector when cleaning up after
an option 3.3 copy "from" data set has been specified.  This corruption
could lead to infinite looping when swapping screens, and S0C1 abends
when terminating a logical session.


R45.7 fixes "fastpath" I/O reduction (and the total file byte count
display), and fixes copying out fixed-length and variable-length records
for PDS member offload (instead of writing out data from fixed low
core).  Menu data set name recall has also had cursor positioning
slighlty improved, and option 3.3 has had the 'C' and 'M' primary
action codes added, as well as a check to prevent copying a data set
to itself.  Options 1 and 3.3 have had option 'Y'/'N' fields added or
moved.



R46 notes

Changes made for the unreleased R45.8 are included in this release.

R46.0 (July 2015) delivers the ability to display member generations
when looking at the member list for a Version 2 data PDSE which is
allowed to have member generations.  Displaying member generations
of program library PDSEs is not currently supported.

The display of member generations is requested via the new 'GEN'
operand of the REVIEW command. ( 'GEN' is not a valid operand when
REVIEW is compiled for MVS/370.)  'GEN' can be abbreviated to 'G'.

Further, the 'REFRESH' or 'REF' command of the member list display
(which causes the directory data to be refreshed from DASD) has two
new operands: 'G' and 'N'.  The 'G' operand specifies that member
generations are shown in the member list, and the 'N' operand
specifies that the normal display without member generations should
be shown.  Note that the 'G' operand will be treated as invalid
unless member generations are supported by the current library.

Member generations can be browsed by REVIEW, and data from such members
can be saved to another data set using the COPYOUT (or CUT) command.

Thanks to Ed Webb and John Kalinich for input regarding exploiting the
FLAG(PAGE0) option of HLASM.


R46.1 removes the old trick of searching for the TLD by following the
FSA from TCBs up that parent TCB chain to silently discover if an ISPF
environment is active or not.  For an ISPF environment to be recognized
by REVIEW, a call to program ISPQRY must issue a return code of zero.
This also removes the pre-OS/390 2.10 method of obtaining the screen
buffer location and cursor screen position.


R46.2 makes several minor changes:
- The FMTPRT command is added to REVIEW to provide manual control over
  whether SYSOUT colour highlighting is active or not.
- Note that FMTPRT also controls the truncation of trailing blanks
  when a COPYOUT (CUT) is performed with a target data set having
  variable-length records.  This can save a lot of space, so FMTPRT ON
  may be useful even if the data is not a print file.  If you want a
  COPYOUT to keep trailing blanks, ensure that FMTPRT is OFF.
- The requirement that member REVPROF is in the REVPROF PDS under
  MVS/370 for ISPF to perform the screen I/O is removed.  (It is still
  a requirement that REVPROF is in the ISPPROF PDS under z/OS for
  REVIEW to operate as an ISPF application.)
- A glitch in the interaction between REVSRCH (FIND from the member
  list display) and RFIND in REVEDIT such that REVEDIT's RFIND would
  not subsequently find all occurrences of the current string has
  been fixed.
- REVOUT now allows an operand which begins with an asterisk to
  represent a request to show all jobs under MVS3.8J with JES2.
- RFE can now be invoked as an ISPF application.
- RFE primary menu options can be stacked by specifying them on the
  TSO command operand separated by semicolons.
- When running as an ISPF application, a check is made for the presence
  of the scroll field arrow.  If it is present panel REVPANEL is used.
  If it is not present then the new panel REVPANL2 is used.


R46.3 makes several minor changes:
- The scroll field detection for selecting panel REVPANEL or REVPANL2
  is fixed for wide screens.
- A check is made that panel REVPANL2 is present before it is used
  instead of REVPANEL.
- A REVEDIT open failure no longer prevents subsequent member browsing.


R46.4 was about impoving operability in the non-IBM freeware ISPF
environment.  For example, recursion detection had to be switched from
looking at the caller's RB to looking at the caller's PSW address
because REVIEW was branched to and not linked to by the ISPF invocation.


R46.5 was also mainly about the new ISPF which does not include a PDF
component, so REVIEW and REVEDIT form this non-IBM ISPF's browser and
editor.  The REVISPF CSECT was moved from REVSUBS to REVSUBS2 and so
is now only included in the 390 compile of REVIEW.  Other changes
include:
- Preserve the change-to string across edit sessions in the same logical
  screen, so it is the same as the search string in this regard.
- Issue a message when variable-length records with trailing blanks are
  detected by REVEDIT when reading the data to be edited.
- In several components, when a command with an invalid operand is
  entered, the command is no longer cleared, but is instead left on
  display with the cursor positioned to the invalid operand.
- The ASCII command was added to REVEDIT.
- RFIND and RCHANGE commands can now be queued by use of a PF key
  assigned those commands.  For example,
  CHANGE ONE TWO
  when entered with PF5 (when 'RFIND' is assigned to PF5) will function
  as
  FIND ONE
  but the 'TWO' string will be remembered as the replacement string
  so that PF6 (when 'RCHANGE' is assigned to PF6) can be pressed to
  effect the change.
- The KEYS command (except when intercepted by IBM's ISPF) will now
  allow PF key assigned values be updated by overtyping.
- REVEDIT now implements software tabs using the new TABS command.
- REVEDIT now has an AUTOSAVE setting.
- Begin introducing the response to invalid operands where the command
  is left visible and the cursor is positioned to the bad operand.


R46.6 delivers the following changes:
- The ability to have line labels has been added to REVIEW and
  REVEDIT.
- More options have been added to the LOCATE command in REVIEW and
  REVEDIT, and to the RESET command in REVEDIT.
- REVEDIT View mode now no longer automatically initializes the
  UNDO (and recovery) facility.
- REVOUT (RFE option 3.8) in a MVS 3.8 JES2 environment now by default
  uses direct SPOOL I/O to access held SYSOUT.  The FIB setting can
  be used to force the use of TSO's OUTPUT command.  The INPUT setting
  can be used to display non-SYSOUT SPOOL data sets.
- REVLEV (RFE option 3.4) is now able to process unqualified data sets
  which are data sets with names not entirely comprised of valid
  qualifiers not exceeding 8 characters in length separated by periods.
  (In the TSO and z/OS catalog context, these data set have invalid
  names.)
- Removal of the internal GETSTOR macro introduced with Release 43 to
  tolerate the differences between the GETMAIN macros of z/OS and MVS
  3.8.  (Before Release 43, the MVS 3.8 version of REVIEW was compiled
  on OS/390 or z/OS.  Since Release 43 the MVS 3.8 version has been
  compiled on MVS 3.8.)  An enhanced version of the GETMAIN macro is
  now used when compiling the MVS 3.8 version of REVIEW.  This version
  of GETMAIN is shipped in usermod ZP60033.
- Other housekeeping and logic bugs have also been fixed.


R46.7 delivers the following improvements:
- The DESERV area size has been increased from 32KB to 512KB so that
  a much larger number of member generations can be listed.
- Member generations can now be selected for ISPF Browse and View.


R46.8 delivers the following improvements:
- When the R member selection code is used to restore a deleted PDS
  member, the STOW data is now moved to below the line as required
  by STOW.  This change allows the member restore facility to now
  work on system levels newer than MVS/370.
- When RACROUTE is used to check RACF access to a non-VSAM data set
  before attempting an OPEN, a RACF violation will no longer be
  recorded by the system if access is denied.  RACHECK processing
  under MVS/370 is not changed.
- The 'HEXX' and 'HEXR' display formats to show character data and its
  hexadecimal bit patterns simultaneously have been introduced.  The
  original 'HEX' command is still available, and may optionally be
  modified by the new 'HEXC' setting.
- The size of the storage size acquired to build the 3270 data stream
  has been increased by 2KB to allow for the 'HEXX' display.
- The non-ISPF default value of PF24 has been changed from 'RECALL'
  to 'HEXC'.
- ZIP directory caching for z/OS UNIX now caters for directories
  as large as 512KB.  This allows most JAR files to be handled.
- The editor's 'RESET' command was corrected to now also reset the
  last line occupied on the screen.
- RFE option 3.5 now supports 8-character userid overtyping.



R47 notes

R47.0 (February 2017) makes the following changes:
- The NAMESCRN routine was moved to its own CSECT called REVNAME.
  REVNAME is now called at strategic times to try to keep the screen
  name more relevant for its current option, instead of just once
  when the logical session is created.
- The characters shown in the 'HEXX' display are now correct and are
  no longer repetitions of the first visible character of the record.
- REVEDIT now fully supports the &SYSUID symbol in the DSNAME value
  of a JCL DD statement for catalog status highlighting.
- In a MVS 3.8 JES2 environment, REVOUT (RFE option 3.8) will show
  the SYSOUT record count for jobs on the OUTPUT or PRTPUN queues.
  The total record count for all selected jobs is shown on the top line.
  Note that the counts do not include records in non-SYSOUT spooled
  data sets.
- RFE option 3.3 will now retain the primary input across a cursor
  selection of a data set name from the historical data set list.
- The inline GETSTOR macro has made a comeback to allow some storage
  requests to request storage above the line under z/OS, while
  requesting storage below the line on some system levels such as
  MVS/XA even when the system provides storage above the line.
  Note that the type of storage requested is decided at compile time
  and not at execution time.
- The MVS/370 load module is marked as AMODE31 to allow it to run
  on z/OS where it would otherwise abend with an S0C4.  It will place
  various areas above the line, including data being held for edit.
  Note that not all functions of the compiled-for-MVS/370 REVIEW/RFE
  package function currectly under z/OS.  Commands which look at
  system control blocks are liable to abend, but at least the basic
  data set processing and 3270 functionality works as expected.


R47.1 fixes a few bugs and adds a couple of features:
- A REVIEW of a tape data set abended with S0C4 but RFE option 1 of the
  same data set worked.  This was caused by a failure to perform screen
  handling initialization logic in the case of the REVIEW command.
- An attempt has been made to support the Large Block Interface
  for tapes containing blocks longer than 32760 bytes, but this
  remains untested.
- The *ALIAS string has been replaced by a green asterisk to flag
  alias members so that the TTR of each alias can still be seen.
- Ampersands in instruction mnemonics are no longer flagged as
  assembler syntax errors.
- The editor's EXCLUDE command has new UPDATED and NOUPDATE operands
  to control exclusion based on whether records have been updated in
  the current edit session or not.
- Parsing of command keyword operands now correctly enforces minimum
  keyword abbreviations.
- Minor formatting properties of HELP members' Function sections have
  been standardized.
- PDS searching in RFE (but not REVIEW) could skip some members improperly.
- PDS searching in RFE option 3.5 (member statistics) now functions.
- The infinite loop in the editor's RESET command when the command did
  not cause the reset of either commands or labels has been corrected.
- Segment overlay programs are now fully supported in terms of program
  library management.  This means that they can now be offloaded and
  reloaded, and their program library can now be compressed when the
  R47.1 version of the REVLMOD and REVLPDS programs are also installed.
  $SEGTAB and $ENTAB are now also shown when scrolled right passed the
  end of CESD blocks in REVIEW.
- Some improvements in the handling of insert lines when tabs are
  active have been implemented.


R47.2 fixes a few bugs:
- A Sense ID CCW is no longer issued by a REVLEV (RFE option 3.4) for a
  System/360 DASD (23nn) device type.  This avoids the IEA000I command
  reject message.  It is still issued for System/370 DASD (33nn) devices
  to report the device and control unit models.  Thanks to Dave Kreiss.
- The variable-length GETMAIN performed after opening the data set to be
  browsed by REVIEW will now request storage above the line under z/OS
  when processing non-VSAM files including UNIX files.  This area includes
  the READ buffer and the record address checkpoint area.  This change
  improves the likelihood that a REVIEW of a tape data set using the
  large block interface (LBI) will succeed, especially when using a large
  screen size.  The buffers for terminal I/O must, of course, remain below
  the line.
- If REVIEW/RFE detects that it is running under a CLIST, a new TSO I/O
  stack will be created for the session, and the original stack will be
  restored when the session terminates.  This change will prevent TSO
  commands invoked from within REVIEW accessing and removing input on the
  stack which was current when REVIEW/RFE was invoked.
- Earlier claims that complete support for segment overlay programs had
  been added were premature.  The support now becomes complete with the
  change to allow RFE option 3.3 to correctly copy segment overlay programs.
  Here are the minimum software levels necessary to correctly process
  segment overlay programs:
  - To compress the program library: REVIEW R47.1 and REVLPDS R47.1.
  - To offload overlay programs: REVIEW R47.1.
  - To reload overlay programs: REVLMOD R47.1.
  - To copy overlay programs: REVIEW R47.2.
- REVIEW has a "data-in-virtual" (DIV) capability to cache data in virtual
  storage to reduce I/O after the data has been read once.  This is exploited
  for a number of facilities including:
   - accessing related IDR data when formatting CESD data when scrolled RIGHT
     past the end of CESD blocks.
   - holding formatted ZIP archive directory entries.
   - browsing subsystem data sets (because REVIEW assumes that NOTE/POINT
     is not supported by subsystems).
   - holding edited TSO HELP data when REVIEW is operating as a fullscreen
     TSO HELP processor.  The editing consists of removing HELP source
     comment records and )I (INCLUDE) control statement records.
  In regard to this last point, the editing means that the cached data does
  not exactly match what is read from disk, and so inconsistencies can become
  apparent when the cached data does not fully mesh with the uncached data.
  To improve this, the default cache limit has been increased from 192KB to
  320KB, REVIEW will treat the data as fully cached when the end-of-file is
  first reached to avoid further I/O for that HELP display, and "early"
  trimming under z/OS is dispensed with.  "Early" trimming is when some of
  DIV storage is freed based on an upper limit calculation which in turn is
  based on the input data set track count.  This track-based calculation
  has been improved for MVS/370 by acquiring the extent count from the DEB
  instead of the DSCB, thereby improving concatenated data set support.
  "Late" trimming which occurs when end-of-file is reached for subsystem
  data sets (for which there is no external size indication) is retained
  even under z/OS.
- Assembler listing source code syntax-based colouring now supports listings
  where the source statement number exceeds 99,999.  The need for this was
  discovered when looking at the listing for REVIEW when assembled on z/OS.
- Coloring the JES2 job log blue in REVOUT (RFE option 3.8) has been extended
  to z/OS.  The overly conceited scheme of comparing the job identifier to the
  temporary data set name low-level qualifier did not account for the extra
  qualifier of H01 being appended under z/OS.
- REVEDIT JCL syntax highlighting for cataloged and uncataloged data sets named
  with DSN= and DSNAME= now process &SYSUID correctly under z/OS.  Previously,
  this worked under MVS/370 but used an incorrect ALET with the z/OS addressing.
- Internal messages related to member errors will now report the correct member
  name more reliably.
- In scenarios where a sequential source of input is required and a PDS data set
  name is supplied, a member selection list can be presented from which the user
  can select a member.  Cases where the member has a name considered invalid by
  DAIR caused screen display errors and earlier versions of REVIEW often
  abended.  To fix this, the name of the selected member in parentheses is
  appended to the data set name, and the input is then processed as if the user
  had typed in the complete PDS name and member name specification.  Note that
  in these scenarios it will not be possible to process a member with a name
  which is considered invalid by DAIR, even though other REVIEW and REVEDIT
  functions may be able to process such members without raising an exception.


R47.3 corrects assembler listing statement number validation so that assembler
listing syntax highlighting works for statements numbered less than 10,000.
'DSNC ON' in REVEDIT has also been fixed to set the correct internal flag.


R47.4 fixes a couple of possible S0C4 abends:
- When searching for lower case characters during input, REVEDIT was not
  correctly handling the case when the data length was a multiple of 256.
- For large screens, the acquired TPUT buffer was not large enough to cater
  for the HEXX display, while HEX and HEXR were not affected.


R47.5 has a couple of small changes:
- Option 3.4 (REVLEV) now shows the correct space allocation for multi-volume
  data sets.  (Thanks, Shelby!)
- Option 1 can now browse virtual storage when the data set name of 'ACTIVE'
  is specified.


R47.6 has a couple of small changes:
- A command with an invalid operand in FSHELP will no longer obliterate the
  primary command input area.  (Thanks to John K.)
- REVEDIT JCL syntax highlighting will now correctly highlight an invalid
  character in a data set name, thereby sometimes avoiding an S0C4 abend.
  (Thanks to Peter G.)


R47.7 delivers several bug fixes and a couple of new features.

Some of the less obscure defect-fixing improvements include:
- Improved I/O stack handling for parallel sessions, both when swapping
  sessions and terminating sessions, reducing the problems encountered
  when running RFE under a shell-type CLIST.
- Fixing the S30A abend encountered when browsing zip archives under z/OS.
  This abend was first discovered by browsing z/OS UNIX jar files.  It
  was caused by moving unzip working storage above the line, without also
  changing the FREEMAIN R to FREEMAIN RU.
- The creation of parallel sessions by a TSO RFE command, which includes
  SPLIT and START command processing, and the termination of parallel
  sessions no longer have any time windows where fullscreen mode is turned
  off, thereby reducing the chances that line mode messages such as job
  end notifications are lost from user view without the traditional three
  asterisks requiring an addtional <enter>.
- The "point and shoot" facility (where the cursor is placed on a data set
  name on the screen at the time a TSO REV command is issued) will now
  also work for a format-8 DSCB (as it does for a format-1 DSCB) when a
  VTOC is being browsed.  Note that in the case where a VTOC is being
  browsed, the cursor does not have to be placed over the data set name,
  but merely on the line showing the record having the relevant data set
  name as its key.
- REVEDIT assembler source code syntax highlighting will now correctly
  handle the case where two consecutive quotes are used in a string to
  represent a single quote, and when the first such quote is in column
  71 and the second such quote is in column 16 of the continuation line.

Two new features suggested by Peter Glanzmann are now implemented:
- Assembler B data type items are now presented as binary digits when
  DSECT formatting is activated.  An underscore is used to separate
  the binary octets of each byte in the data item.
- The new RDW command will cause the display of record descriptor words
  when set to ON.  The INVALID COMMAND message will be shown when RDW is
  issued and RDWs are not present.  RDWs are only deemed to exist when
  records are read using a DCB which specifies a variable-length record
  format.  Also note that for multi-segment spanned records, the value
  shown as the RDW will have been constructed and will represent byte
  contents which may not actually exist in the data set being browsed.


R47.8 mainly delivers bug fixes.  Changes are:
- The primary command area will now vary in size according to width of
  the screen.  This will allow longer commands to be issued on wide
  screens.
- The maximum RECALL command length has been increased from 50 to 90
  characters.
- RECALL processing now dynamically detects the end of the primary
  command input area, truncating recalled commands if necessary to
  avoid corrupting the screen layout.
- Recalled commands will not be erased until after screen reshow
  processing so that pending line mode messages do not cause the
  recalled command to disappear before being presented for executing
  either with or without further editing.
- Glitches in FIND logic relating to column numbers introduced with
  the RDW command have been corrected.
- MVS/370 RFE main menu graphics displays are now centered when being
  shown on wide screens (instead of always being in specific columns).
  And for screens of at least 132 columns and 47 lines that have no
  usable graphics capability, the assignment of real storage frames is
  represented at a scale of one screen character location per 4KB page
  frame.


R47.9 changes are:
- The column number labels for the REVIEW browser's ruler line can
  now display 6-digit column numbers, which can occur for data sets
  with an undefined record format created by the large block interface.
- When a volume is specified for a REVLEV (RFE option 3.4) data set
  list, free space statistics accumulated from the format-5 DSCB chain
  are shown under the totals line for the listed data sets.
- Data sets found to have the RACF protection indicator set in the
  VTOC will have an 'R' displayed between the CREDT and EXPDT columns.
- A defect in REVPANEL/REVPANL2 ISPF panel selection introduced when
  longer command lines for wide screens was introduced in R47.8 has
  been fixed.
- Support has been added for 8-byte TSO user IDs and data set name
  prefixes introduced with z/OS 2.3.



R48 notes

R48.0 (February 2018) introduces the following enhancements:
- The REVEDIT FIND family of subcommands - which includes FIND (or F),
  FINDNOT (or FN), EXCLUDE (or EX or X), EXNOT (or EXN or XN), and
  CHANGE (or CHA or CHG or C) - now supports additional operands to
  restrict the records which are processed.  Firstly, two line labels
  can be specified to limit the range of records to a subset of the
  total body of records, and secondly either the UPDATED or NOUPDATE
  keywords can be specified to limit processing to only those records
  which have been updated this edit session, or only those records
  which have not been updated this edit session, respectively.  The
  minimum abbreviation for these keywords is the first 3 characters.
- UNIX path names beginning with a tilde will be recognized as
  specifying the home directory (as suggested by Bruce Koss of Wells
  Fargo).  This applies not only to the path specified as the operand
  of a REVIEW TSO command, but also to navigational "jumping" where,
  when a UNIX directory entry list is being displayed, a new fully-
  qualified directory path is entered into the primary input area
  to specify the directory that REVIEW should "jump" to.

R48.0 also fixes the following problems:
- After REVEDIT exits and returns to REVIEW after an EDIT request to
  edit the data set being browsed, the heading line was not restored
  to the value it should be for the REVIEW browser.
- When running without APF authorization (which should be all the time
  unless you are browsing a VVDS or BCS) on a system using the ACF2
  security product, the original form of RACROUTE will be used to
  obviate the need for security administrators to add GSO records to
  allow REVIEW to access checks for data set access while unauthorized.
- A browse search in the backward direction (REVIEW FIND PREV/LAST)
  did not search the first 4 data bytes of variable-length records
  when RDW OFF was set.
- REVEDIT edit recovery allocated the PDS of the member being edited
  exclusively instead of shared, and did not free it at the conclusion
  of the edit session.
- It was not possible to copy a PDS member in RFE option 3.3 to a
  differently named member in the same PDS.  For this to work now,
  the "to" and "from" member names must be supplied with the data set
  name.
- A CHANGE ALL of only blank(s) to a null string caused an infinite
  loop in REVEDIT.  The solution to this is to limit such changes to
  one per record per CHANGE ALL command.
- When HILITE OFF was set in the profile when an edit session started,
  HILITE could not be activated immediately by command, but only by
  exiting the session such the the profile was updated, and then
  restarting the edit session.
- If the REVIEW command specified a z/OS UNIX file, and then the DIR
  command was issued, a corrupted directory display would result.
- The TSO HELP for REVEDIT FIND incorrectly stated that the default
  string type was C whereas in fact it is T.
- When performing a CHANGE command in REVEDIT:
     c cat dog
  will always cause the replacement string to be DOG no matter what
  CAPS is set to.
     c cat c'dog'
  will always cause the replacement string to be dog no matter what
  CAPS is set to.
     c cat t'dog'
  and
     c cat 'dog'
  used to always cause the replacement string to be DOG no matter
  what CAPS was set to, but now both of these commands will set it
  to DOG when CAPS is ON and dog when CAPS is OFF.


R48.1 addresses five issues:

Firstly, an S0C4 abend when formatting CESD blocks has been fixed.
CESD blocks are formatted when scrolling right past the end of the
blocks to show the details of each ESD entry correlated with other
data extracted from the translator and user IDR logical records.
This abend occurred when in 31-bit addressing mode and the load module
member had long IDR logical records.  The high byte of GPR5 had been
appropriated for other uses while it was saving the GPR15 value, from
which an address placed in GPR14 was calculated, which caused the
abend when the high address byte was lost.  This bug is years old.

Secondly, to allow some sort of control over where TSO users can
allocate new data sets (anyone remember PCF II?), several of the new
data set allocations performed by REVIEW/RFE will now be tried first
using the TSO user's default unit name as supplied from the user's
UADS member or RACF TSO segment or equivalent, as appropriate.

One example where no change has been made is the temporary data set
used by a REVEDIT SUBMIT command which first uses UNIT=VIO but will
retry using UNIT=SYSALLDA if the first attempt fails.  Another example
is the CONDENSE data set used by RFE options 3.1.C and 3.4.Z where
UNIT=SYSALLDA is still used, but it is expected that normally the
CONDENSE data set will only have a short lifetime during which there
is no user think time.

One example where the default unit is now used is the allocation of the
data set used to hold SYSOUT data for browsing in REVOUT (or RFE option
3.8).  Previously, UNIT=SYSALLDA and SPACE=(CYL,100) were used in the
dynamic allocation request, with a retry reducing the space to
SPACE=(CYL,(5,2)).  Now, the initial request specifies the default unit
name with SPACE=(CYL,(200,20),RLSE).  The first retry changes the unit
to SYSALLDA, and the second retry sets SPACE=(CYL,(5,3),RLSE).  Since
the data set is allocated, opened, loaded and closed at machine speed,
the RLSE setting means that users will not be idly browsing data sets
occupying vast DASD estates unless that acreage is actually needed to
hold the volume of data being browsed.  Also, the initial primary space
quantity of 200 cylinders eliminates those pesky 2314 OS/360 SORT
volumes from the DADSM volume selection process.

Thirdly, unzipping from data sets with variable-length records would
abend with S0C4 as a result of collateral damage flowing from the
introduction of the RDW command.  This is now fixed.

Fourthly, FIND with a picture search string was not working properly to
the extent that blanks and semicolons in picture strings were treated
as generic mask characters and not as themselves.  This was caused by
using a single translate table to handle both EBCDIC and ASCII generic
masking characters.  This was fixed by using two separate translate
tables.  Improved housekeeping also means that ASCII picture searches
are also now functional in REVEDIT.

Fifthly, as a result of advice from Wally Mclaughlin, GETLINE macro
settings have been improved to eliminate various misbehavings in a
CLIST environment pertaining to the I/O stack.


R48.2 caters for handling program members with a residence mode of 64:
- Member list displays will show RMODE=64 programs in yellow.
- MAP displays produced using the Version 1 ESD interface will now
  show RMODE=64 as 64 instead of MIN, and will also now show the
  segment overlay region in which overlay sections reside.


R48.3 brings numerous fixes and several enhancements.

Enhancements are:
- Text extent records are no longer shown in a program object map
  to improve readability.
- REVEDIT JCL syntax highlighting now recognizes the new statement
  types introduced in z/OS version 2.
- The handling of prefixing FIND and CHANGE commands with RFIND and
  RCHANGE has been regularized.  This means that there is now no dependency
  on PF key usage, and that the command will behave the same whether
  executing under ISPF or not.
- REVDIV has been reworked so that "DIV" storage is now expandable.
  As a result, smaller sizes can be requested without limiting capability.
  One benefit is that module maps of large complicated programs can now
  run to completion without exhausting DIV storage.
- The ECTRTCD field is now maintained when appropriate so that CLIST
  &LASTCC processing can function correctly.
- The data byte count shown on the BOTTOM OF DATA line is now accurate
  up to 4GB minus 1.  As always, this count does not include BDWs,
  RDWs, record-ending CRLFs, and other bytes used for data control.
- REVIEW support for browsing multi-volume sequential data sets, which
  includes sequential concatenations comprised of BASIC and/or LARGE
  single-volume and/or multi-volume data sets, now allows seamless
  up-and-down scrolling across volume boundaries.  The volume serial
  shown on the top line will be that of the last record shown on the
  screen.  The RECORD FROM BLOCK AT LOCATION details which can be shown
  on the right of the screen for each record will now show a TTRK value
  instead of just the TTR, where K is the relative volume number which
  is zero for the first or only volume.  Note that TTTR values will
  continue to be shown when the data set has the DSNTYPE=LARGE attribute.
  Note that REVIEW does not support concatenations of unlike data sets,
  so all of the data sets in the concatenation need to be on volumes from
  the same device class and have compatible DCB attributes.

Fixed defects include:
- The new data set attributes specification panel will now accept
  record formats with additional characteristics, such as carriage
  control, and spanned records or standard blocking.  (Defect reported
  by Charles Bailey.)
- When exiting after searching a program PDSE, abend SC0D at task
  termination (caused by the storage of an open DCB being freed)
  will no longer occur.
- RFIND/RCHANGE cycles to vet the change before making the change no
  longer skip the current found data when searching in the backward
  direction.
- When a member in the non-first library of a concatenation was edited,
  the top line indicated the correct data set, the correct data set name
  was used in member serialization, but the data set from which the member
  was read and to which the new data was saved was the first data set in
  the concatenation.  This is now fixed.
- The data set information display will no longer abend when the subject
  data set is a PDSE with a type (DATA or PROGRAM) but with no version
  information available.
- More work to cater for the RDW ON/OFF setting has been done, this time to
  keep the column range specification in the PDS search panel consistent
  with that of the REVIEW browse FIND command.
- The data set information display will no longer attempt to obtain the
  format-4 DSCB from the VTOC to obtain the number of tracks per cylinder
  when processing VIO data sets (because the VTOC does not exist) or on
  MVS/ESA or later system levels at all (where a cylinder always has 15
  tracks).
- Fix erroneous recursion status indications by maintaining a count of
  concurrent or parallel sessions, thereby eliminating sessions that
  cannot be swapped to, and abends at termination time.
- FSHELP will only blank columns 73 to 80 of displayed HELP member
  records if they contain sequence numbers, thereby avoiding the loss of
  HELP text if it happens to extend beyond column 72.  (EX DRK)
- RFE option 6 is no longer selectable when RFE is operating as an ISPF
  dialog, as it does not function correctly in that environment.  In
  fact, the original design was that RFE would never run as an ISPF
  application, and was coded accordingly, but that decision was reversed
  when subsequent requirements arose.


R48.4 brings a couple of enhancements and a few fixes.

The main enhancement is that member name masking is now available in
three particular usage scenarios, NONE of which involve any extensions
to the syntax that can be used to invoke REVIEW/RFE from the READY
prompt.  In all cases, the length of the member name mask is limited to
8 characters, and the available masking characters are an asterisk for
zero or more characters, and percent for any single non-blank character.
Generic masking characters may be omitted to request a specific member.
Be aware that when an asterisk or percent is encountered in a member
name specification, some syntax checking is bypassed, so it may enable
the selection of members with non-standard names in some cases.

1. When viewing a data set list in option 3.4, a new MEMBER (or MEM for
   short) primary command is available to search all partitioned data
   sets in the list for a member with a name which matches the mask.
   Processing commences with a RESET action, so last command indicators
   are cleared.  Searched libraries are flagged with a last command
   indicator of an asterisk.  If the asterisk is shown in red, the
   data set could not be processed for some reason.  Libraries with at
   least one matching member will be shown in white or high intensity
   in the data set list.

2. When viewing a member list, a new MEMBER (or MEM for short) primary
   command is available to tag all members which match the mask and
   untag all members which don't.  There is a similar command called
   PATTERN (or PAT for short) which searches member names for a string
   match.  Effectively, PATTERN performs the same processing as MEMBER
   after prepending an asterisk if the mask does not start with a
   generic masking character, and appending an asterisk if the mask does
   not already end in an asterisk.  So MEM *ABC* does the same search as
   PAT ABC (as does PAT *ABC*).

3. When RFE presents a data set specification panel which allows a member
   name to be specified, a member name mask may be used to filter the
   members selected for display in the member selection list.  Generic
   masking may not be permitted for some utility actions.

And now to minor enhancements:
- The H (for History) member selection code can now show some Enterprise
  PL/I compiler settings.
- A MAP of non-migratable program objects will no longer display
  labels that have the same name as the section they are in when they
  are at section offset zero to improve the signal-to-noise ratio.
- RFE data set and command history items are now tab-selectable (where
  previously the arrow keys had to be used to position the cursor).

The following defects are now fixed:
- When exiting from a REVIEW PARMLIB FILE session an S0C4 abend could
  occur under z/OS.  This was due to an incorrect work area being used
  for the deallocating IEFPRMLB macro.
- An UNZIP selection could encounter an S0C9 abend from a CVB
  instruction where the input decimal number was too large.  Logic
  which bypasses this issue is now used.
- The hexadecimal data displayed with HEXX ON was completely irrelevant
  even though the character data shown on screen was correct.  Data
  housekeeping gone wrong.
- Minor cursor placement improvements are made for RFE menus when bad
  data set and volume input are encountered.
- RFE option 3.4 (REVLEV) will now correctly order sorts by date when
  the dates range across the most recent (at the time of writing)
  century boundary.
- The progress bar display for PDSE program library searches has been
  fixed.


R48.5 changes are:
- The H (for History) member selection code can now show some
  Enterprise COBOL compiler settings.  ARCH and OPT settings are now
  shown for Enterprise PL/I, Enterprise COBOL and XL C/C++.
- The S430-03 abend when a CUT subcommand is processing a z/OS UNIX
  file is now fixed.
- The member name mask fragments of ** and *% are no longer rejected
  as invalid syntax.  Internally, multiple consecutive asterisks are
  condensed to a single asterisk, and asterisk-percent (*%) fragments
  are converted to percent-asterisk (%*).
- RFE option 3.4 (REVLEV) now has a new command called SRCHFOR which
  can searched listed data sets for specific data.


R48.6 changes are:
- The keyword operand tables for the DELETE and SORT commands in
  REVEDIT are fixed to restore proper functionality of those
  commands.
- A REVCREAT new data set attributes input panel layout glitch is
  now corrected.
- On those occasions when REVPDS would display a selection code
  legend line on the bottom screen line, those displays will now
  be based on the ISPF visible line count rather than the screen
  line count.  This change may allow the line to be seen even when
  ISPF is displaying a SWAP action bar and/or PF key values.



R49 notes

R49.0 (July 2019) changes are:
- Add addressing mode switching logic to the MVS/370 version for
  MVS/XA-like operating systems.
- Make more display scenarios aware of the visible line count under
  ISPF, rather than always using the terminal's line count, thereby
  improving vertical scrolling when the SWAP action bar and/or PFK
  values are on show.
- Enhance the display produced by the JPA (or CDE) command for z/OS
  2.3 (and later) when the screen has at least 100 columns.
- Add support for native 3270 partial screen updates and TGET NOWAIT.
  This is used by the RFE main menu display under MVS/370 to update
  resource status displays without user interaction.
- Fix processing of Z390 extended fields in zip file headers.
- Improve zip archive comment extraction and display, especially for
  ZIP64 archives.  Note that the unzip logic is not aware of ZIP64
  extensions.


R49.1 fixes the following problems:
- The RB/TCB display would also show TCBRBP as the address of every
  RB under the task.
- The CDE/JPA display could S0C4 abend for z/OS 2.3 and later.
- REVEDIT would S002-A8 abend when saving a PDSE member with more
  than 15,728,639 (x'17FFFF') records.  Reported by Tom Conley.
- Only up to 7 digits could be shown for the number of lines in each
  exclusion block.
- Only up to 9 digits could be shown for the match count of a FIND ALL
  command.
- PDSE space abends would cause a S0C6 abend because the CHECK macro
  branched to address 1.  Sx37 abends can close the DCB, but this is
  historically delayed until the CHECK macro is issued.  For PDSEs
  any space abend can be encountered at the time of the WRITE macro
  and so the DCB will be closed by the time the subsequent CHECK is
  issued.


R49.2 fixes the following aspects of asynchronous partial screen updates
that were really only evident when running MVS 3.8:
- REVCMPBF was not performing 3270 compression because the expected
  triggering RA order was not present.  SBA orders not specifying
  location 0 will now enable compression as well.
- Field attributes were not being decoded properly, causing the menu
  option names (1, 2, 3, etc) to become invisible.
- The instantaneous available frame count (AFC) has now been added to
  the MVS 3.8 non-graphics large screen primary menu real storage
  display.


R49.3 provides minor enhancements to some displays:
- Assembler listing syntax highlighting has improved handling for
  continuations when breaking an unquoted operand, an operand within
  quotes, and comments.  Note that some glitches may well appear when
  the start of a continued statement does not appear on the screen.
  While open code is shown in green and red, generated code in blue and
  pink, a new third red and pink scheme is used for inserted code.
- The JPA or CDE command will now show the data set name more reliably
  under z/OS 2.3 and later on screens with at least 116 columns.
- The TCB or RB command will show the instruction length count (ILC)
  and interrupt code for request blocks, will use the full screen
  width when showing load list element program names, and will show
  all data set names for open BPAM DDs.
- Both JPA and TCB will now correctly adjust their displays for any
  hidden ISPF lines such as for PFSHOW and SWAPBAR etc.


R49.4 provides minor functional enhancements and fixes:
- NEWTOP 0 for sequential data sets has been fixed - it was broken
  when full support for concatenated and multi-volume sequential files
  was added.
- The global area (recursion vector and recall stack) is now explicitly
  freed upon termination of the last parallel REVIEW session to fix a
  memory leak under ISPF on MVS 3.8.  (Thanks, Wally.)
- The TCB / RB command's display of data set names for open sequential
  files has been corrected.
- When spool file contents are being displayed by directly accessing
  the JES2 spool, records longer than 132 print columns will no longer
  be truncated.  (When such files are displayed by using the TSO's
  OUTPUT command, OUTPUT will wrap records longer than 132 print
  columns to the next record.)
- A rare unzip problem with REVIEW's inflate logic has been fixed.
- A REVEDIT screen corruption when displaying excluded lines with
  CAPS OFF has been fixed.


R49.5 provides minor functional enhancements and fixes:
- Unzipping binary data to fixed-length records will now not create an
  extra record when the data is an exact multiple of the record length.
- The formatting of a zip archive comment will now limit the length of
  comment handled to avoid overlaying other items in working storage.
- Dynamic storage management for REVPDSE has been revamped so that
  instead of acquiring up to 768KB below the line for working storage
  and for holding directory data, only actual working storage is
  acquired below the line while up to 3MB is acquired above the line
  to hold directory data.  This reduces BTL storage usage and also
  allows the display of larger numbers of members.  Under both the
  old scheme and the new scheme, unused storage not needed to hold
  directory data is freed before the member list is displayed.
  (Thanks to Michael Fleissig for reporting use case experience dealing
  with PDSEs containing tens of thousands of members.)


R49.6 provides minor functional enhancements and fixes:
- DSINFO will show COMP and ENCRYPTED when data sets have those attributes.
- DSINFO will not report OBTAIN failures for volumes after the last
  volume containing data for multivolume data sets - the cause of such
  failures being that the data set has never had to expand to that volume.
- STAX admin has been revamped with the current logical session now
  always "owning" the attention exit.
- For MVS/370, when TSO commands do not issue a STAX, an attention
  interrupt will cause REVIEW/RFE to detach the command's subtask
  causing it to S13E abend.
- For MVS/370, whenever REIVEW/RFE is running APF authorized and an AC=0
  command processor is to be attached, SYNCH will be used to become
  unauthorized, thereby avoiding potential S306 abends.
- For MVS/370, attached TSO command processors will be covered by an
  ESTAI to prevent a subtask abend yielding a READY prompt, which would
  simply require an <enter> to restart the main REVIEW/RFE task if the
  TSO command abended.  If the TSO command does abend, some summary or
  indicative dump data will now be displayed via write-to-programmer.


R49.7 provides minor functional enhancements and fixes:
- Fixed the annoying (for me, at least) BLDL error message when browsing
  a zip archive with a comment exactly 78 bytes long.
- Fixed the glitch where RFIND would not advance when browsing variable-
  length records and the cursor was moved back to home.  This was most
  noticable when repeating FINDSMF when browsing a sequential data set.
- When SMF ON is set, FINDSMF will now highlight the record type of the
  found record using reverse video.  This assists with tracking progress
  through a block of consecutive records of the same type.
- Additional PL/I compiler settings are now included in the display
  generated by an H selection code of Enterprise PL/I executables.
- Commands in error are preserved on the command line for user fix-up for
  additonal reasons above the previous single reason of invalid operand.
  However, commands in error are never left on show under ISPF.
- With all that logic to decode .PCX, .BMP and .GIF images hardly ever
  being used because hardly anyone has 3270 graphics support turned on,
  a REVIEW of such image types will now result in a "pixel zoom-in" or
  extreme close-up where each pixel will occupy a character location on
  the screen.  Left/right and up/down scrolling can be used to scroll
  around the image bitmap.  GIF animation will not be processed in this
  display mode.  This display mode can be suppressed by the DATA operand.
- The SSI display of PDS load modules has been fixed - only the high 3
  bytes were shown after 2 leading zeros.
- The COPY command of REVED now allows a data set name to be specified
  as the command operand, allowing the data set prompt to be circumvented
  as long as no errors are encountered.

