For Your Information:  About Deru Sudibyo's commercial automation
product, which is called zJOS.  This free offering, zCBT in this
file (File 770 of the CBT Tape), is a subset of zJOS.

I am author, owner, architect, and developer of  zJOS-XDI(R), the
modern integrated mainframe automation solution package.  zJOS-XDI
consists of 3 products, Sekar to automate actions against any
system event, Puspa to automate workloads scheduling and AutoXfer
to automate spool/report files distribution from mainframe to
small computers.   AutoXfer was done in about 6 months on
partner's sites.  Whereas Sekar and Puspa were completed during
around 6 months at home with remote access to partner's system.
All products work for either a single or networked mainframe
hosts.

On networked mainframes environment, combined Sekar and Puspa
provide an integrated automation solution.  Event on any host can
trigger actions on several hosts.   A job on any host can be
triggered by several job events on several hosts.    All are
managed centrally.   Such functions are very competitive against
any other automation solution products in the world.  Since in
fact only few independent software vendors (ISV) provide such
solution, zJOS-XDI supposed to be very marketable products.
Should you curious to try, please kindly download this demo.

zJOS-XDI package is a proven solution.   Nevertheless, as in my
country there is no chance for its future, I decided to sell it to
any ISV who capable to market it.  Existing local install bases
are just a step to prove its functionalities and quality in the
real world.  It was actually designed to be acquired by world
class ISV.

zJOS-XDI currently only supports z/OS and OS/390 platforms.  In
the enterprise environment, to support other platforms, all you
need is to develop agent for each platform based on zJOS agent
protocol design which is already documented.  Should you
interested to share with me developing non-mainframe agents, I am
glad to say welcome.  Once non-mainframe agents are supported,
zJOS-XDI then becomes world class enterprise automation solution.

Besides, I also produced some freeware as an obligation to my
"true world".   Although currently I am very busy with
agro-industry activities which is in very critical situation, I am
still developing freeware for future contribution.


