 VM reader survey

Many thanks to all our readers who filled in our recent reader survey.  With
nearly 1700 subscribers it is very useful for us to get feedback on how those
subscribers view VM Update.  The survey asked how many people at an installation
read each issue of VM Update.  The mean average result was 3.25, which gives VM
Update a readership approaching 6000 people throughout the world.


LIKES
The survey demonstrated quite clearly that what was liked most about VM Update
was the variety of articles that were published, and the insight it gave into
the problems and solutions found by other experienced VM professionals.  Many
found the technical orientation and practical relevance of the articles to be
very helpful and one subscriber said that the journal "filled the holes left by
IBM".


CHANGES
The survey asked subscribers what changes they would like to see in future
issues.  Many said none, but the most frequently suggested change was for the
code to be available in machine readable format.  This is obviously sensible as
re-keying articles is both time consuming and likely to be error prone.  We are
currently investigating methods of satisfying this requirement, and will let
readers know what conclusions we come to.

Some subscribers criticised the inclusion of simple EXECs commenting that they
had already written them or something of a similar nature.  However, other,
newer VM users praised the inclusion of the more straightforward EXECs as a
great help in setting up their sites, and in their own learning process, in
particular with examples written in REXX.

Another criticism was the inclusion of articles which described a solution to a
problem which had already been covered in an earlier issue.  Again, other users
had listed this as a 'like' because it gave an alternative insight into the way
that VM technicians solved problems.

Some readers said that they would like to see a question and answer forum.
While there are no plans to implement that idea immediately, if users are
experiencing problems or specific difficulties we would like to hear from them
and will print their letter and any solutions sent in by other readers.

Although the majority of respondents felt our new extended size of 52 pages was
about right, there were still 27% who wanted this to change because they thought
it was too short.


RELEVANCE
Readers were asked to specify what percentage of the articles they found to be
relevant to their installation.  The replies ranged from 5% to 100% with the
modal average being 50%.  This variation can be explained as being due to the
range of VM releases in use and the fact that some sites had MVS as a guest
system and found VSE articles irrelevant, others had VSE as a guest system and
found MVS articles irrelevant, while still more did not run a guest system and
found both MVS and VSE articles irrelevant.  Even so, using suggestions sent in
by readers we intend to improve this rating by the time of our next survey.


USE
We were interested to know what practical use readers had made of information
published in VM Update.  A few sites said that they had not used actual articles
as such, but had taken ideas from articles and made use of them.  Many of the
sites gave two or more examples where they had installed code and were now using
it regularly.


 FUTURE TOPICS
When asked what topics that they would like to see in future issues our readers
came up with a number of suggestions.  Foremost amongst them were requests for
information, hints and tips, and other user experience with performance and
tuning.  The other two areas most frequently mentioned were VM's relationship
with VTAM and SNA, and VM/XA experiences.  We hope to cover these topics more
fully in forthcoming issues and we are looking for potential authors now.

Other topics that were often suggested for future articles included hints on
problem determination, and third party product evaluation.  Amongst the other
suggestions were: EXEC2 to REXX conversion; use of SVC201; coding CCWs; RSCS
hints and tips; REXX coding 'tricks'; office automation; system management
techniques; dial-up security; DASD management; and SQL use under VM.  Anyone who
wishes to contribute articles on these topics, or any other subjects related to
VM, should send their articles to the editor, Trevor Eddolls, at either of the
addresses shown on page 2.


OVERALL OPINION
The overall opinion expressed was very pleasing with nearly all respondents
expressing positive opinions like "very informative, there is nothing else like
it" and "well worth the money".  Nearly 10% of sites used the term "excellent"
and  nearly a third said "very good".  We were glad that so many readers had a
high opinion of VM Update.  However, the comments and criticisms made have all
been noted and we intend to address them as soon as possible.

Finally we would again like to express our gratitude to all the people who took
the trouble to complete the survey and hope that their efforts will lead to an
even better VM Update for all our readers.

)Xephon



































