 Recent announcements from IBM

The IBM announcements on Tuesday 20th October 1987 set many people thinking that
the days of the guest operating system were numbered.  This was because many VSE
users have VSE installed mainly to run CICS, and if CICS can be run directly
under VM (which most of them already have installed) they could remove VSE.
Unfortunately this is not the case.  It has been hinted that the likely drop in
licence revenues that would result from this caused IBM to release a version
that was aimed specifically at 9370 users, rather than the large mainframe user.

CICS/VM as announced is specifically not a competitor to CICS/VS or CICS/MVS,
because it will not handle high volume transaction rates, and release 1 offers
only a subset of the usual CICS facilities.  Therefore, guest operating systems
are still required.  However, its introduction is a nod in the direction of VM
users' requirements and could be the first step on the road to a fully
functional CICS/VM system.

It is worth noting that there is already available a product from Unicorn
Systems (see VM news issue 8), called VMCICS.  This is marketed as a 9370
product, but claims to remove the need for a VSE guest. On the plus side it is
available now, compared with June '88 for CICS/VM.  On the minus side it costs
from #10 000 to #30 000.

The most exciting news in the announcement is bound up in the VM/SP release 6
anouncement.  This new release of VM removes one of the biggest problems that
CMS users ever experience.  A user may store many files on a single mini-disk.
The problem occurs when others try to access these files.  Currently, access is
at the mini-disk level; in future, access will be at the file level.  This is
facilitated by the Shared File System.  It will allow multiple reads and a
single write at any one time on a shared file.  Also, files can be shared by
multiple CMS users across multiple VM systems including across an SNA network.

The Transparent Services Access Facility, which was introduced with VM/SP
release 5 to provide LU6.2-like  communication for non-SNA networks, has been
enhanced.  The new APPC/VM interface now allows TSAF to communicate with SNA
networks.

Another announcement with future significance is the distributive node executive
interface (VM/DSNX).  There is some speculation that in the future one central
site will be able to control any number of remote sites, and users at any site
(with appropriate authorisation) will be able to access files at any other site.
VM/DSNX release 1 provides a limited way for central sites to download software
and data files to a remote processor.  It was also announced that this will be
enhanced when another new product called NetView Distribution Manager (NDM)
becomes available.  NDM will link with VM/DSNX release 2 and allow synchronous
communication between processors while requiring almost no intervention at the
remote site.

Other items included in the announcement were:
%    The Callable Services Library - lets programmers access VM functions and
services without having to write Assembler sub-routines.

%    RSCS version 2 release 3 - provides support for ASCII printers and
plotters.

%    VM/IS release 5.1 - supports new optional packages including CICS/VM and
VM/DSNX.

%    VM/IPF version 2 release 3 - supports VM/SP release 6.

%    PVM release 4 allows PVM to connect to another PVM using APPC/VM and VM/SP
release 6.

Release dates for all these products are after March '88 and up to 2Q89, or
later.

 ) Xephon 1987

































































