 Performance monitoring tools

This article was written in  response to readers' requests for some information
on VM performance monitors.  There are basically two types of software
performance monitors: there are those that give a real-time image of what is
happening on the system at any given moment; and there are the historical
monitors, which report what has happened over a given period of time.
Associated with both these are capacity planning and modelling programs.  The
following list contains performance monitoring tools and associated software
packages that are available to users of VM, and is given to illustrate the range
of products available.

ADABAS Performance Analysis System/Insight from Database Utility Group.  Mainly
associated with ADABAS the DBMS, but will allow usage reports to be generated.

BEST/1-VM from BGS Systems.  This is a computer modelling product.  It enables
the user to predict future capacity requirements quickly and accurately.  It can
be used stand-alone, and it will link to CAPTURE/VM and CRYSTAL.

CAPTURE/VM from BGS Systems.  This is a system performance reporting and
modelling product.  It enables users to predict future capacity requirements
quickly and accurately.  It can be used stand-alone, but will link to BEST/1-VM.

CMS Command Monitor Analysis Package (CMAP) from VM/CMS Unlimited.  This
measures what is done on CMS machines, including performance and user behaviour
analysis.  It can be used stand-alone or to produce input to the SAS System.

CPWATCH from University of Waterloo.  This has passed through the hands of
numerous programmers.  It provides basic system performance data in real-time,
although without reporting exception conditions.

CRYSTAL from BGS Systems.  This is an application modelling product for new
applications not yet implemented.  It enables the user to quickly and accurately
predict capacity requirements for the future.  It can be used stand-alone.  It
will link to CAPTURE/VM and BEST/1-VM.

EXPLORE/VM from Goal Systems.  This contains comprehensive real-time and batch
reporting facilities with exception handling.  It can be used stand-alone, or it
can be used to produce input to the SAS System.

OMEGAMON/VM from Candle Corporation.  This checks for potential problems every
few seconds and offers in-depth analysis of VM resources.  It may be fully
customised by means of user-defined screens and menus.  It can only be used
stand-alone.

SCERT II from Performance Systems Inc.  This product measures overall system
capacity, and has a modelling capability.

SMART from IBM.  A familiar package to all - although more properly called VM
Real Time Monitor.

Vital Signs from Blue Line Software Inc.  This allows both real-time and
historical reporting, as well as DASD modelling and exception monitoring.  It
can be used stand-alone, or can be used to feed data into the SAS System.












