 CICS/VM - an evaluation

Although CICS/VM Release 1 is not available until July of this year, enough
information is now available to make a reasonable evaluation of what exactly it
has to offer.

On the negative side, the performance of CICS/VM seems to be quite inferior to
its MVS or VSE equivalents.  It has been estimated that maximum transaction
rates would be in the range of 50 to 60 per minute compared to a typical maximum
in excess of 200 per minute with the MVS or VSE versions.

A second disadvantage relates to file access.  This is achieved through the use
of server machines, either VSAM or SQL/DS.  If the CICS system is to make use of
Transient Data or Temporary Storage then SQL/DS becomes a pre-requisite because
these functions are implemented using SQL/DS, and this may involve a site in
extra (unplanned) expenditure.  Additionally, it will only allow access to data
held at a remote site if that data is managed by a CICS system.

Thirdly, there is no support for older macro level systems which might prevent
VSE or MVS CICS users throwing away their guest systems and running all CICS
applications under CICS/VM.

Many people consider the implementation of CICS/VM as a CMS application rather
than in a virtual machine controlled by GCS to be a disadvantage.  However, this
implementation does lead to many of the advantages offered by the system.  For
example, a user need not be aware of the difference between the CMS and CICS
environments.  Additionally the user need only log-on once, to the CMS user-id,
and not have to re-enter a user-id and password when entering the CICS
environment.  This will be achieved either from a menu, or by entering a CMS
command.

An advantage from the point of view of the systems programmers is the way that
CICS/VM is maintained.  The use of tables has been replaced by panel definitions
and the whole process, thereby, simplified.

Also on the positive side is the advantage offered to the program developer.
With the MVS or VSE versions of CICS it is possible to write to various parts of
storage within the CICS partition.  Sometimes this will overwrite code that is
already stored there, because CICS does not offer any kind of storage
protection.  Storage violations of this kind are not a problem with CICS/VM
because running under CMS each application runs in its own virtual machine and,
therefore, program isolation is automatic.

Clearly CICS/VM will not be able to replace the MVS or VSE versions of CICS, but
might be of use to those 10% of VM sites that do not run a guest system.  Its
targeted market must be the smaller 9370 installations rather than traditional
mainframe users.  The simplifications make it an acceptable product for those
smaller sites with limited systems programming experience which would be
expecting to install VM/IS as their operating system.  However, there are
clearly still difficulties for these sites to overcome.

) Xephon 1988














