 SELCOPY under CMS
Approaching CMS with a SELCOPY manual for the first time is not always easy.  I
hope, therefore, that some of the following points may be of use to other
CMS/SELCOPY users.
Consider the following EXEC:
&Control Off
Filedef * Clear                    (Clear out any duff filedefs
Filedef Sysprint Disk                which may be lurking !)
Filedef Sysin Term
Filedef Infile Disk Profile Exec A
Filedef Outfile Disk Profile Listing A
&Begstack
Read Infile Worklen 200
If Eof Infile
  Then Goto Eoj
New Outfile Form 1 Lrecl 80
&End
&Stack
Selcopy
&Exit &Rc
REXX enthusiasts will require the 'Queue' instruction in order to stack the
Selcopy EXEC:
Queue "Read Infile Worklen 200         * Input Profile"
Queue "If Eof Infile"
Queue "  Then Goto Eoj"
Queue "Now Outfile From 1 Lrecl 80     * Write output"
         Queue
         Selcopy
SELCOPY executes under CMS when a routine is called from the stack by the
SELCOPY module.  It is, in fact, possible to use SELCOPY interactively, as in
the following example, but it is time-consuming, and of negligible benefit.
>     Selcopy                                <enter>
>     Read Infile Worklen 200           <enter>
>     If Eof Infile                     <enter>
etc, press 'Enter' to start the routine running.
All assignments and input/output files must be declared using the CMS filedef
command when the SELCOPY routine executes.
With the first EXEC, the work area may not be cleared between writing one record
and the next.  After each write operation put:
Pos 1 Med X'40'
Move 80 From 1 to 2
Secondly, the Sysprint assignment, although valid, is only useful if you execute
just one SELCOPY EXEC, from within your CMS EXEC.  If you execute more than one,
your listings will be overwritten!  One solution is to assign Sysprint to the
virtual CMS printer, which will ensure that there is a separate listing for each
SELCOPY routine executed.  This gives:
         &Trace *
Filedef * Clear
Filedef Sysprint Printer (Lrecl 133
Filedef Sysin Term
Filedef Infile Disk Profile Exec A
Filedef Outfile Disk Profile Listing A
         &Begstack -Sel_1
Read Infile Worklen 200
If Eof Infile
  Then Goto Eoj
Now Outfile From 1 Lrecl 80
Pos 1 Med X'40'
Move 80 From 1 to 2
-Sel_1
         &Stack
         Selcopy
         &Exit &Rc
The SELC EXEC sets up certain defaults for running SELCOPY and invokes the
SELCOPY module.  However, for the purposes of demonstration, examples where
filedefs are issued individually are more useful.  Although the entire EXEC may
 be replaced with a CMS 'Copy' command, I am illustrating aspects of SELCOPY/CMS
that I consider to be inadequately covered by the CBL manual.
Another problem concerns tape handling.  The CMS filedef command supports
various options that determine what sort of tape label processing (if any) will
be carried out during job execution.  The easiest (although not the best) way of
handling input tapes is to ignore the tape header altogether and to read the
tape as unlabelled.
For example, let us assume that XYZ Finance are submitting an end-of-month
payroll tape.  The input tape would be defined thus:
Filedef Tape01 Tap1 Laboff           (Tape01 = 181)
The data on the tape could then be used to determine whether the correct tape
was mounted, eg:
Rd Tape01 Lrecl 1024 Worklen 3000
If Pos 45 Ne 'XYZ'
 Or Pos 60 Ne 'Payroll'
  Then Syslog 'Wrong Tape Mounted'
  Then Goto Cancel
This approach, however, obviously requires a detailed knowledge of the file
layout.  Whether or not you can afford to ignore tape headers will depend
entirely upon your installation.
) Xephon 1988













































