 Performance monitoring tools - revisited
Following are some thoughts on and experience with the tools described in VM
Update of January 1988.
If the tools from BGS Systems are to be used to their fullest extent and maximum
benefit, all are required;  also required is SAS.  The cost of this (when we
enquired - some $50 000) was not considered justified in our case.  Moreover, we
are using GDDM and would have to install SAS to use the modelling capabilities
of BGS Systems.  And SAS is by no means easy on the bank balance or the CPU.
Finally, BGS would not allow for any trial period.
SMART and VMMAP are two products:  one for real-time, the other for analysis of
trends and utilisation.
We tried VPAC and found it very useful, but slanted toward accounting and rigid
in its reporting structures.
We did not try Vital Signs because the literature we received showed it to be
rigid in its reporting structures.  The modelling facility for DASD was not
sophisticated enough for our purposes.
VM MONITOR from VM Software requires, to be fully used, two more packages from
VM Software: VM SORT and VM ARCHIVE.  Here again, the total cost of all packages
made it prohibitive for us.
We also tried EXPLORE/VM (we were a beta site) and chose that product for the
following reasons:
1    It is a real-time monitor and historic reporting facility in one package.
2    It has excellent graphical representation of whatever variables are
required (in seven colours if the terminal allows it).
3    It has many pre-programmed report screens which can be chosen from menus
and give the choice of columnar or graphical representation.
4    It has a facility to run user-written EXECs at intervals chosen by the
user.  We use an EXEC called IDLEUSR to purge any user that has been inactive
for more than 15 minutes; users that are allowed to be inactive can be excluded.
5    It has a very good method of collecting to-date data.  In our case we merge
daily data until the end of the month and run monthly reports in graphical
format.  There is a facility to compress the data and omit that which is not
considered important for the installation.
     The most important monthly reports are:
     y    The comparison of a group consisting of five VSE ids with the total
system for CPU ACTIVE.
     y    The percentage of disk I/O that is used for paging as a function of
total disk I/O.
     y    The I/O per second for 3370 channels and for 3380 channels in pairs as
a check on balancing I/Os.
     These reports are run twice:  once for every 30 minutes from 0800 to 1600
hours and once for each working day of the month.
6    It has an easy method to move monthly data to tape, merge several months
and use the tapes as input for further analysis.
An afterthought: there are many courses in tuning and performance improvement.
We have looked for a course that teaches how to use all the information
collected over time to decide when it is necessary to acquire a larger CPU or
more and/or faster DASD.  Is there a course that teaches how to use performance,
and possibly accounting data, for 'capacity planning'?
If any readers can help with this query we shall be happy to print their
replies.
J P Broekhof
Software Analyst
Toronto Hydro Electric System (Canada)  ) Xephon 1988












