 VM/VTAM experiences
BACKGROUND
We run VM/HPO 4.2 and MVS/SP 1.3.6 (PMA) on a 4381-3 CPU.  Since we are
currently doing very little towards any office automation functions, IBM offered
to loan us a fully-equipped 9370 PROFS system on a 3-month trial.  The 9370
terminals (PS/2 Model 60s) were placed in our company's administrative offices,
mostly with users with no previous computer experience.
A key period of the trial would be demonstrating that we could efficiently
connect the 9370 to our 4381, and also to a Wang mini in another part of our
company.  This article will address our experiences of installing GCS and VTAM
on the 4381 and configuring a multi-domain network encompassing VM on the 9370,
and both VM and MVS (which already had VTAM running) on the 4381.
INSTALLATION
The first step the manuals recommended was to determine storage needs for the
VTAM virtual machine.  We weren't particularly concerned with proper tuning at
this point since there was a good chance the whole thing would be rejected at
the end of the trial, so I decided to use the example in the book.  The sample
allocation size was 10 megabytes.
The next step was to put the GCS shared segment and VTAM DCSS entries in DMKSNT.
Once again, there were good-looking examples in the manual, although I checked
all their maths just to be on the safe side.
We went to the GCS installation guide to generate GCS.  All went well until the
first 'IPL GCS' command, which immediately crashed with a 'CP LOOP DETECTED'
message.  After some poking around and tracing, I found there was nothing in
memory where the GCS shared segment should be.  It occurred to me that we had
done nothing to tell the GENERATE EXEC that we were relocating the shared
segment, so I went through the manuals again.  Surprise!  There is no mention
anywhere in any of the GCS manuals of what you do to relocate the shared
segment, even though the VTAM installation assumes that you will.
Luckily, it wasn't as bad as it first looked.  There is a 'GCSLOAD EXEC' that
works exactly like the 'CPLOAD' EXECs.  I made a couple of 'SLC' files for my
new addresses, updated the EXEC, and was off.
The rest of the installation worked all right and the verification procedures
went smoothly.  Now it was time to define a terminal for our own testing, which
I put by itself in a major node called 'XYZZY'.  I VARYd it active, and VTAM
dumped and died.  I tried a few hundred combinations of different parameters,
then called IBM Support.  No luck with Level 1; Level 2 came up with something
after two days of debugging.  The support person finally asked if the CMS file
containing the major node was RECFM V.  It was: we changed it to RECFM F LRECL
80; problem solved, and we'd originated another APAR, still open at this
writing.
MULTI-DOMAIN CONFIGURATION
We had only two real problems with this part once we finished searching through
the books and figuring out what all the different node entries were for.  First,
the 9370 came with VTAM 3.1.1 already installed on VM/IS 5.0, and a truly
incredible number of (mostly useless) major nodes defined.  After we had
stripped the configuration down to just the ones we needed, and modified them
where needed, we still couldn't initiate a session with the 4381 - something
about 'requested Class-of-Service not available'.  I finally stripped all the
'DLOGMODE' cards out of the terminal definitions in the 9370 and it started
working.
The second problem occurred when trying to connect both the VM/VTAMs to our
existing MVS/VTAM.  The MVS/VTAM was Version 2.1, which is more rigorous about
MAXSUBA values and has to be set to the same value on each system that the VTAM
2.1 system is communicating with.  After that was corrected, our network was
functional.
CUSTOMISATION
The only customisation I planned was to add an 'Application Menu' to each VTAM
by replacing the USSTAB with my own.  All went well on the 4381, but I couldn't
get VMFLKED to work on the 9370.  As far as I can tell, VMFLKED on VM/IS Rel 5.0
has a bug, and will erase your input 'TEXT' file before using it.  Look around
line 272 and you'll find an ERASE command, which I commented out.  If you want
to trace the EXEC first, please note that IBM has placed several 'SET CMSTYPE
HT' commands before the line in error, which will inhibit your trace.
Keith Burton (USA)  ) Xephon 1988

