 Multiple SCP support - PR/SM
IBM recently announced a new facility for supporting multiple SCPs on a single
CPU complex.  The new facility is called Processor Resource System Manager or
PR/SM (pronounced PRISM) for short.  PR/SM is available on 3090-E models only
and requires an optional hardware feature, the 'PR/SM feature'.  The latter
replaces the previously announced 'MHPG feature' and enables use of PR/SM and
the MHPG facility of VM/XA SP.
With the PR/SM feature installed the CPU complex can be operated in a new
'Logical Partition' (LPAR) mode.  In this mode the CPU complex can be divided
into up to 4 logical partitions (8 on a physically partitioned MP) each of which
can run its own SCP.  Each partition is allocated central storage, expanded
storage (if required), channels and central processors.  Storage is allocated in
multiples of 1MB.  Channels and storage are dedicated to the partition and
cannot be shared with other partitions.  Devices may be shared between
partitions by the use of separate channel paths from each partition.  Central
processors can be dedicated to a partition or shared with other partitions.
Most resources can be reconfigured without requiring a power-on-reset.
PR/SM gives IBM, for the first time, a means of supporting multiple SCPs on one
system without requiring the use of VM.  At first sight PR/SM appears similar to
the Multiple Domain Feature (MDF) offered by Amdahl on their processors and
indeed PR/SM has been seen by a number of commentators as IBM's response to MDF.
There are, however, a number of detailed differences between PR/SM and MDF in
implementation.  Amdahl machines use special purpose hardware to partition the
system into up to 4 domains (Amdahl's term for what IBM calls a logical
partition). The hardware dedicated to each domain operates in the mode
appropriate for the SCP being run (either 370 or 370/XA mode).  There are,
therefore, no restrictions on an SCP running in a domain other than those
imposed by the basic architecture as defined in the relevant IBM Principles of
Operation manuals. PR/SM uses the SIE hardware to create its logical partitions.
Indeed it seems that IBM has moved just enough of VM/XA SP into hardware to
implement the Multiple High Performance Guest facility without requiring VM.
(LPAR mode increases the size of the HSA by 4Mb presumably to hold relevant
control blocks for SIE.)  Under SIE the hardware operates in 370/ESA mode (which
includes XA mode) but 370 mode is emulated by the SIE hardware and firmware.
This leads to lower performance for 370 mode SCPs and to a number of
restrictions.  For example, a 370 mode SCP cannot run in true MP mode since it
is limited to a single channel set.
Because PR/SM uses the SIE hardware this hardware is not available to SCPs
running in a logical partition and SIE performance is reduced for such an SCP.
Accordingly support for VM/XA SP2 running in a partition is limited to testing
and development use - V=R and V=F guests are not supported.  Support is
specifically excluded for all other versions of VM/XA.  Users requiring multiple
SCP support in a heavy CMS environment are advised not to use PR/SM but to use
VM/XA  SP1 with Multiple High Performance Guests (MHPG).
A further difference between PR/SM and MDF is in the scheduling techniques used.
MDF uses a simple time slice method which incurs little overhead and allows a
domain to be given a precisely defined CPU allocation.  PR/SM uses an event
driven scheduler which dispatches partitions on a priority basis.  There appears
to be no precise way of allocating CPU resource to a partition apart from
dedicating CPU engines, and overhead could rise quite high at times of peak
activity when lots of events must be handled.
A system running PR/SM with partitions running dedicated processors is stated to
perform at 88% to 110% of the Internal Throughput Rate of the same system
running single image.  With dedicated processors there should be no scheduler
overheads so this statement is saying very little.  At the bottom of the
performance range we see the SIE overhead involved in supporting 370 mode SCPs.
At the top of the range we see the benefits of removing MP software overheads,
for example by running two uniprocessor partitions on a dyadic instead of a
single SCP.  With non-dedicated processors there will be some scheduler overhead
in addition.  Further performance information is promised later (3Q88).  For
comparison an MDF system typically gives an ITR in the range 95% to 115% of the
same system running single image even when processors are shared between
domains.
In summary, PR/SM is an interesting new feature which offers users of 3090-E
processors increased flexibility in using their systems.  PR/SM is in many ways
similar to the Multiple High Performance Guest feature of VM/XA SP but without
 requiring a VM system.  This can only be good news for those sites that need to
support multiple SCPs but do not have VM experience.
David Johnson
Regional Systems Engineer
Amdahl (UK)    ) Xephon 1988





























































