 Shared File System

The Shared File System introduced with VM/SP Release 6 provides CMS with a
centralised filing system that is quite different from the individual mini-disk
system in use currently.  It is also quite different from IFS (Interactive File
Sharing).

IFS was designed to allow several CMS users to share and update up to 17 VSAM
KSDS datasets.  Each CMS user would pass a request (using DL/I-like calls in his
program) to IFS.  IFS ran in a service virtual machine and used VMCF to
communicate between this and the user's application.  The files could be
accessed subsequently by VSE or OS.  IFS was little used because of the small
number of files supported, because it lacked DL/I support, and because of the
small number of sites that use native VM for application work.

With SFS (a CMS facility) files are held in file pools, and managed by a file
server machine.  The size and location of all pools are site dependent.    File
space is automatically allocated from these pools.  Each user is assigned a
maximum amount of space which may be used; however, no disk space is allocated
until required.

SFS introduces multi-level or hierarchical directories.  Files in the
hierarchical filestore are addressed by a name whose top 2 levels of 'directory'
are the name of the file server machine and the user-id of the owner - eg
FILESRV.user-id.myprog.  Up to 8 further levels are allowed and each directory
name can have up to 16 characters.

File sharing allows one user to write to a file while many users are reading it.
The file server monitors the file and provides a consistent view to all users.
A single file can now be spread across more than one volume and can also reside
on a separate, but connected, VM system using APPC/VM.  SFS has exits and
interfaces to allow it to be connected to an External Security Manager (ESM).

Files residing in the filestore can be accessed directly by specifying their
hierarchical name.  The ACCESS command can be used for a directory as it is
currently for a mini-disk.  An application will see the files in the directory
as though they were on a mini-disk.  Existing CMS files can be moved from mini-
disk to SFS pool using the COPYfile command.

SFS has not yet been announced with HPO or XA.
     ) Xephon 1988

























