
VM security
Security at an installation can be a major problem unless only a few highly
motivated and completely trusted employees have access to the system.  Even so,
a site may still suffer from fire, flood, earthquake, explosion or impact, loss
of essential services eg electricity supply, or terrorist action.  Such sites
should, however, avoid theft of equipment, logic bombs, indiscriminate hacking
and physical damage to hardware.  Also they should avoid the problems of
unauthorised access to data, unauthorised use of programs and unauthorised use
of CPU cycles, I/O, or magnetic storage media.  Typically, most security
packages will address some or all of the last three problems.  Security guards,
security cards and locked doors may help prevent some of the others.
There are four areas of security addressed by the basic VM system. These are:
y    Logon security
y    Virtual machine memory security
y    Command class security
y    Mini-disk data security
Logon security ensures that only authorised users can gain access to the system
by requiring them to enter both a logon-id and a secret password.
Virtual machine memory security is attained by assigning each user a separate
virtual machine, thereby ensuring storage isolation and preventing any one user
viewing the contents of another user's memory.
Command class security ensures that users can execute only a restricted range of
commands.  With early releases commands were assigned to seven classes, A to G,
with G for the general user (H was restricted to IBM use).  With SP release 4
and above 32 classes are available.  Each user is assigned a command class.
Each class has a limited subset of the full range of CP and CMS commands
available to it.
Mini-disk security is maintained by the use of passwords.  A user who wants to
access a file on another user's mini-disk must enter the correct password in
order to gain access to that mini-disk.  Three levels of password are available:
read, write and multi (both MR and the dangerous MW).
The most significant 'weak link' in these security areas is that, apart from the
second item above, they are specified in the user's virtual machine description,
which is contained in the directory.  The file is usually called USER DIRECT and
can be modified using the DIRECT command or using the DIRMAINT utility program.
Problems with USER DIRECT can cause the system to crash and cause IPL problems.
Usually access to the directory is restricted to the systems programming
department, and password changes are made by a single system administrator.
However, preventing unauthorised access to this one file can be a problem.
One of the biggest problems facing a data administrator is that of finding out
exactly what happened during a security violation.  Security can be compromised
by users revealing their passwords.  If a logon-id is used by someone else there
is no way of identifying who it is because there is no record of the location of
the user nor the time of the logon.  A similar problem occurs when many users
share a password; there is no way of identifying the actual person who is (was)
logged on.  Use of Passthrough offers much the same problem - there is no way to
locate a remote user.  A local user may make use of this fact to DIAL PVM to a
remote site and back to the local processor, thus making his location
untraceable.  With more knowledge of the system a user with class C privilege
could modify VMBLOK and assume the identity of another user.
Access to data on disk can be easily achieved and difficult to detect.  To
access another user's mini-disk a second user can LINK to it, assuming that he
knows the password.  Passwords for shared mini-disks are known to many and are
often easy to find out.  The details of all passwords are stored in the
directory.  Any user who has read access to a VSE or MVS guest system disk would
be able to read all data files on that disk irrespective of any security system
installed on the guest.  If a user had mode 0 files stored on a read only disk
these could be accessed by another user by copying the contents of the mini-
disk, using DDR, to a new empty mini-disk.  There the files could be read.  It
is also possible to allocate a new mini-disk at a location occupied by an
existing mini-disk.  The owner of the new mini-disk would be able to read the
data files in the old mini-disk.
Many sites have made modifications to the basic VM system to prevent some of the
more obvious security violations taking place, but real security involves the
purchase of an External Security Manager (ESM) package.  These may provide added
 security when accessing mini-disks, or may offer across-the-board security
including spool files and logon security.  Some of these, eg RACF/VM, ACF2/VM
and CA-TOP SECRET, are VM versions of MVS packages and can link to the MVS
version if MVS is run as a guest system.  OMNIGUARD will act as a security
package for VM, VSE and CICS environments, but not MVS.  It is best suited to
sites that have those three packages installed.  ALERT/VM and VM/SECURE were
both written specifically for the VM environment and do not interface with
packages running on a guest system.  They would be best suited to sites that
need only to secure their own VM systems.
Use of a security package will prevent many of the problems mentioned above.
However, none can fully prevent a determined attempt to get round the system.
It is really a problem for management to ensure that no staff are motivated to
work against the company that employs them.
J Phillips
Consultant (UK)     ) Xephon 1988



















































