 3270 Entry Assist
Have you ever wished for PC-type word processing tools on your 3278?  Or written
XEDIT macros for functions such as Word Tab and Word Delete?  If so, Entry
Assist is for you!
Entry Assist is a productivity feature available on IBM 3x74 control units
(Configuration Support D) and the 9370 Work Station Adapter.  It provides Word
Tabs (backward and forward), Word Delete, typematic character delete,
destructive backspace, column tabs, cursor-position display, right margin 'bell'
signal, screen margins, and Word Wrap (automatic new line).
To enable Entry Assist, known as 'DOC mode', press ALT and simultaneously the
blank key at the left, above the CURSR BLINK key; if Entry Assist is available,
'DOC' will appear on the last line of the screen (below the status area).  There
will be an arrow pointing downward next to DOC indicating that Word Wrap is on.
Press ALT and IDENT (the key below the CURSR BLINK key) to disable Word Wrap
(for now).  Some keyboards have control keys in different places; a little
experimentation will find them.
With Entry Assist on, XEDIT a file and experiment.  We find the most useful keys
to be Word Tab and Word Delete.  To use Word Tab, press ALT and Cursor Right
(the right arrow) or Cursor Left (the left arrow), for word forward and backward
tabbing, respectively.  These keys normally cause the cursor to move left or
right two characters at a time; in DOC mode, they move the cursor left or right
a blank-delimited word.  Similarly, the ALT and DELETE keys delete an entire
word.
Entry Assist functions in XEDIT allow recovery of the previous contents of the
line by hitting CLEAR or by putting the cursor on the first character of the
line and hitting ERASE EOF followed by ENTER.  This is because the control unit
is performing the functions; XEDIT does not see the changed line until you hit
ENTER or a PF or PA key.
To set screen margins, column tabs, and the right margin 'bell' signal, press
the blank key (used to turn DOC mode on) without ALT; a scale line will appear
at the bottom of the screen.  This is CHANGE FORMAT mode, and selects settings
for Entry Assist.  Pressing the blank key again leaves CHANGE FORMAT mode.
When in CHANGE FORMAT mode, the right margin 'bell' signal is set by placing the
cursor on the desired column and entering an asterisk (*).  An asterisk will
appear on the scale line showing the 'bell' column.  When you are typing and the
cursor passes this column, the terminal alarm will sound.
To set column tabs while in CHANGE FORMAT mode, position the cursor on each
column where you wish to set a tab stop and press the Field Tab key (not a
TABKEY PFkey).  The tab stop will be indicated by an underscore on the scale
line.  When you leave CHANGE FORMAT mode, the Field Tab and Field Backtab keys
will honour these tab stops; this can be very useful when entering Assembler or
other structured language (PL/I, FORTRAN, REXX) programs or large amounts of
tabular data.  The Field Tab keys will still honour fields, as before; they also
stop at the tab stops you have set.  Clear individual tab stops by placing the
cursor on the appropriate column in CHANGE FORMAT mode and pressing the DELETE
key, or clear all tab stops by hitting CLEAR.
Two special characters bracket the scale line: a 'less than' sign (<) at the far
left and a 'greater than' (>) at the far right.  These represent screen margins,
which affect Word Wrap and NEW LINE (above the ENTER key) operation.  Set the
left margin by entering < at the appropriate cursor position when in CHANGE
FORMAT mode, and the right margin with >.
In DOC mode, the NEW LINE key places the cursor at the left margin, rather than
at the start of the first unprotected field on the next screen line.
The keyboard will lock if you type when the cursor is at the right margin, even
if the field the cursor is in extends across the margin.  To avoid this, enter
CHANGE FORMAT mode and put the cursor on the right margin; then press the CURSR
SEL (cursor select) key.  The right margin indicator will change to a broken
vertical bar; when Word Wrap is not on, the keyboard will not lock if you type
at the right margin.
To experiment with Word Wrap, turn it back on the same way you turned it off, by
ALT and hitting the IDENT key; the arrow will reappear next to 'DOC'.  Word Wrap
occurs when any character other than DUP or a blank is placed in the column
positon immediately left of the right margin on the line the cursor is on: the
blank-delimited word is 'wrapped' to the left margin on the next line.  Word
Wrap does not occur if the next line is protected, or if there is insufficient
space between the margins on the next line for the insert.
 This means that Word Wrap is generally of limited value, except in XEDIT INPUT
mode, when the line below the cursor line will always be blank.  If you normally
have PREFIX ON RIGHT in XEDIT, you can set your left margin in column 1 and your
right margin in column 72, and use Word Wrap when just entering text on lines
inserted with the ADD subcommand; with PREFIX ON LEFT, you can set the left
margin in column 5 and the right in column 80, but then find strange results in
INPUT mode when text wraps to column 5 of the next line!
Typematic character delete is obtained by holding ALT and pressing the brace or
'curly left bracket' key, above the right-hand SHIFT key; this will delete
characters as long as the key is held down.
Typematic destructive backspace only works when the INSERT key has been pressed
to place the terminal in INSERT mode; in this mode, the Backspace key (the key
above the Field Backtab key) not only moves the cursor one position to the left,
but also deletes the character at the cursor.
Finally, the position of the cursor on the physical screen can be momentarily
displayed in the right-hand bottom corner of the screen by holding down the ALT
key and pressing the CURSOR UP key.
In practice, some Entry Assist features are not useful; for example, the cursor
position display would probably only be used when designing full-screen panels.
DOC mode also adds a few quirks to the way some keys behave: Field Tab no longer
tabs from the bottom of the screen to the first unprotected field, nor does
Field Backtab tab from the top of the screen to the start of the last
unprotected field; and the Backspace key is a destructive backspace only when
INSERT mode is on, which is counter-intuitive.
The Word Wrap features can be troublesome; it is particularly irritating for the
keyboard to lock whenever a command is long enough to reach the right margin!
Our programmers prefer DOC mode ON, Word Wrap OFF, left margin at column 1, and
right margin set (via CURSR SEL) at column 80.  In this mode the word tabs and
word delete still operate, as do the typematic delete, the right margin 'bell',
the 'show cursor' function, and the destructive backspace while in INSERT mode.
Entry Assist, available on most 3x78, 3x79, and 3180 terminals, is documented in
IBM manual GA23-0119, IBM 3270 Information Display System: Entry Assist User's
Guide.
P Cornelius
Senior Systems Programmer (UK)     ) Xephon 1988































