 I/O and performance
At many VM sites the main bottleneck that affects overall performance is the I/O
subsystem.  This article overviews some of the ways that performance could be
improved.
The placement of files within mini-disks can improve or hinder performance.  It
is advisable to put files that end in EXEC or MODULE on a separate mini-disk to
data files.  This will stop data files being searched when only the first part
of the name of an EXEC or MODULE is keyed in.  It is also a good idea to sort
the files on a mini-disk into order of use.  If the most frequently used ones
are placed at the front they will be found soonest.  Another general rule is to
ensure that the files are not fragmented.
When the controller is looking for disks to service it will look for a
particular bit setting.  For a busy disk that bit will be set almost every time
that a search is performed.  The problem arises because the search is always
sequential starting at the beginning.  Once a request is serviced the search
starts from the beginning again.  If the busy disk is placed first on the string
it will be serviced every time the bit is set.  This means that any other disks
on the string that require servicing may have to wait a long time, and so impact
on performance.  The optimum arrangement is to place heavily used disks at the
end of a string and less heavily used disks at the start of the string.  Similar
logic applies to the arrangement for strings and controllers.
Neither SP nor HPO have a channel balancing algorithm.  When a Start I/O (SIO)
is issued it will attempt to find a path to the device.  If the path is busy the
I/O will be queued in the channel and the system will not know it is being
queued.  The effect of this is that any alternate channel specified will never
be used.  The usual method of trying to reduce the queueing in a channel is to
alternate the definition of which is the primary path in the DMKRIO macro.  An
example is given below:
     RDEVICE ADDRESS=(150,4),DEVTYPE=3380,ALTCU=250
     RDEVICE ADDRESS=(254,4),DEVTYPE=3380,ALTCU=150
With XA, there is a channel balancing algorithm available.
It is always a good idea to put high activity volumes on separate channels, and
heavily used software should be placed on separate disks.
Performance can be improved if heavily used mini-disks are cached rather than
duplicated.  This is because these mini-disks will stay in cache memory and,
therefore, access times will be very fast.
In general it is best to format disks into 4K blocks.  This maximises disk usage
and also large blocksizes reduce the number of I/Os required.  To reduce the
amount of disk head movement and thereby improve performance, the optimum
location for heavily used mini-disks is around the middle of the disk (not the
centre).
     ) Xephon 1989
























