 VM/XA SP maintenance
Maintenance of VM/XA SP differs greatly from that of VM/SP HPO and even VM/XA
SF.  The new maintenance scheme, called SES-II (Serviceability Enhancement
Support stage II), replaces the much disliked VMSERV EXEC with several new
tools.  The goals of       SES-II are automation of and improved control over
the VM maintenance process; for the most part, SES-II succeeds.  Highlights
include:
y    Multi-volume Program Update Tapes (PUTs): IBM will no longer need a VM
'refresh' level simply because service will not fit on one tape.
y    The new tools do not assume that each PUT will overlay the last one: any
number of PUTs may be kept on-line without the need to redefine disks each time.
y    Additional disk layers (for local modification or fixes) may be defined by
the installation.
y    Several user exits are supported (to LINK disks for example).
y    Corrective service will be shipped in a PUT-compatible format; a single PTF
sent by the Support Centre is processed with the same tools as a PUT.
y    PTFs can be ordered separately even if they are on a PUT; thus a fix for a
specific problem may be ordered without having to apply a whole PUT.
y    The CP loadlist is maintained via UPDATE, though obscurely: changes to the
loadlist, formerly made manually to an EXEC, are made by updating macro HCPMDLAT
and assembling module HCPLDL to create a new loadlist.
The bad news is that SES-II attempts to make Object Code Maintenance (OCM)
acceptable by appearing to offer the flexibility and control of source-level
maintenance; in this area, it fails.  The 'patch' facility, essentially an
enhanced CMS zap command with 'shell' update files created by SES-II when a PUT
is applied, attempts to improve OCO/OCM service; alas, it remains impossible to
remove a single fix from an OCM module.  If such an object file is needed it
must be custom-ordered from IBM, a process historically slow and difficult, if
not impossible, owing to varying service levels between the Support Centre and
the customer sites.
Experienced VM system programmers must learn to use SES-II, or invest
significant effort in redeveloping local installation tools.  The PUT format has
changed sufficiently for existing tools not to work.  For example, AUX files for
source-based modules are created when a PUT is applied.
SES-II is still evolving.  PUT 8805 contains new versions of the maintenance
tools, and subsequent PUTs will be in a slightly different format.  If
installing VM/XA SP, ensure that PUT 8805 is installed, or that your base is
post-8805, or you will be unable to install later PUTs.
SES-II is documented in chapters 6 to 14 in VM/XA SP Installation and Service
(GC23-0378).
Phil Smith III
VM Systems Group (USA)   ) VM Systems Group 1989
























