The benchmark blues
Whenever a processor is upgraded or replaced it is usual to carry
out some kind of test of performance to find out how much better
(or worse) the new system is compared to the original system.
With VM the usual criteria that are applied would include the
following:

%   Total CPU utilisation
%   Number of active users on the system (Q1 and Q2)
%   Paging related data
%   I/O related data.
Unfortunately, these are neither accurate, nor valid as a means of
comparing processor performance.  The problem is that most
statistics are dependent on the multiprogramming level.  The
multiprogramming level can be affected by the length of a
timeslice used.  The calculation of the timeslice is dependent on a
variety of factors that make it inaccurate as a basis for
comparison.

With VM, the scheduler maintains three queues made up of
virtual machines (eg CMS users, PROFS users, etc) that would
like to process.  Q1 contains those virtual machines that have
completed their last task in a short time; Q2 contains virtual
machines that took longer to complete their last task; and Q3
contains very long running tasks and is typically associated with
guest operating systems.  Q1 virtual machines are selected for
processing by the scheduler eight times more frequently than Q2
virtual machines, and 64 times more frequently than Q3 machines.
Q3 users get eight times longer to process than Q2 users, and 64
times longer than Q1 users.  The problems with processor
comparison are a direct result of this timeslicing.  The length of
time that a Q1 user can spend processing can be different for
every processor.

The timeslice is calculated, at IPL time, by executing a complex
subset of instructions and timing how long they take to complete.
The time taken for an 'average' instruction to process is calculated
and compared to the time taken to process the instruction on a
370/145.  From this result the 'speed' of the processor is calculated
and the value for the timeslice (quantum) determined.

Although there are between 5000 and 6000 machine instructions
carried out, the size and complexity of the instructions does not
make an accurate measurement of processor speed.  Factors that
can affect the time taken for an instruction to execute include
variation in:

%   Processor cycle times
%   Storage access cycle times
%   High-speed buffer cycle time.
Also the level and type of microcode assists installed can vary
with different processors and, therefore, the instructions that are
assisted (speeded up) can vary.

If the length of a timeslice is longer on one processor than the
other it can cause an alteration in the elapsed execution time for
some  virtual machines.  The reason for this is that a user in Q1
will be placed in Q2 if a particular transaction does not complete
by the end of a timeslice.  If the timeslice is longer, the user will
not be placed in Q2 and will continue to process in Q1.  Q1 users
are selected for execution eight times more frequently than Q2
users.  Staying in Q1 can dramatically reduce the elapsed time for
execution of a sequence of instructions.

The length of a timeslice can, therefore, affect the
multiprogramming level, ie a short timeslice will result in fewer
users in Q1 and more in Q2.

If the timeslice were identical for two processors being compared,
this might still not give valid results because different numbers of
instructions might be executed in a given timeslice on the different
processors.

Any statistics that can be affected by the multiprogramming level
cannot be used to compare processor performance.  This makes
comparing the performance of any two VM systems extremely
difficult.

    ) Xephon

