Capturing VM/VTAM tuning file in GCS

We have VM/SP R5 with VTAM 3.1.1 running in a GCS
machine.   VTAM has an option in VM to write tuning records to
a user file.  This file is opened at VTAM start-up with a file name
of FILE TUNSTATS A and is specified in the PROFILE GCS for
the VTAM machine with the FILEDEF label TUNSTATS.  This
file is readable only when the file is closed and the file is closed
when VTAM is shut-down properly (ie Z NET).  Since in our
installation the VTAM shut-down occurs rarely, and then near
midnight, I was interested in capturing the file when VTAM was
shut down so that I could review it during normal working hours
and not require operator intervention.

My initial idea was to do a sendfile each time VTAM started but
experimentation proved that in GCS my options were very
limited.  It seems that GCS has only a subset of CP commands
and no CMS commands.  After a number of false starts I came
across a method that does what I want.

In the PROFILE GCS for VTAM I put the following line:

	datea = DATE(SORTED)

DATE(SORTED) is a REXX function and datea is a variable of
my choosing.  Then the FILEDEF statement was changed to
'FILEDEF TUNSTATS DISK FILE' datea 'A1'.  The quotes are
important because they delineate what the REXX interpreter will
try to use as a variable and what to pass unchanged.  The variable
datea contains the current date in CCYYMMDD order (eg
19890215) and the CMS file name for the filedef TUNSTATS is
FILE 19890215 A1 (using the example date).  This means that
each time VTAM is started it will open a file with a different
filetype, which allows me to review the previous data at my
leisure.

This method has two drawbacks.  The first is fairly obvious.  The
VTAM disk written to will start to fill up after a period of time.
If, during the time VTAM is up, an attempt is made to write a
tuning record and the disk is full, VTAM will crash.  So at some
point someone must IPL CMS in the VTAM machine and erase
those old files.  The second problem is that to prevent VTAM
from crashing you must make a fairly large mini-disk.  I've made
the disk large enough to last for a month.  Since I generally have
to come in after hours at least once a month anyway, I added this
to my routine.  Another possible problem is that if VTAM were
started twice in the same day the data from the first start-up would
be lost.  Since this is a rare occurrence and the lost data would be
minimal I don't consider this a problem.

Ideally, IBM should allow CMS commands to be executed in
GCS.  This would increase the usability of GCS and eliminate this
whole procedure.

John Stith
Data Communications Analyst
ILC Data Device Corporation (USA)	) Xephon 1989

