Reading about REXX

All of us have been exposed to IBM documentation at one time or
another.  While it is usually (?!) complete, there are no detailed
explanations or numerous examples.  This makes it particularly
comforting to have other reference books available for an IBM
product.  The following is a review of two such reference books
that are available for REXX:

1   The REXX Language - A Practical Approach to Programming
by M F Cowlishaw, published by Prentice-Hall, Inc (ISBN 0-
13-780735-X)

2   Modern Programming using REXX by Robert O'Hara and
David Gomberg, published by Prentice-Hall, Inc (ISBN 0-13-
597329-5)

As you probably know, Mike Cowlishaw is the creator of REXX.
The first book is his description of REXX, its history and
background, and a detailed look at the language itself (based on
the February 1985 version 3.50).  Part 1 of the book discusses the
background of REXX and is some 14 pages long.  We are given a
summary of the language itself, concepts that went into its
implementation, and the history of REXX.  Part 1 gives us an
understanding of what REXX is and how it came to be.  This
builds a solid foundation for parts 2 and 3 that follow.

Part 2 is a definition of the language.  This section comprises a
major portion of the book and is about 120 pages long.  It is a
detailed look at REXX itself.  Topics such as structure, syntax,
expressions, operators, clauses, variables, assignments, and
external environment commands are discussed.  This discussion is
clear and concise, accompanied by examples.  Following this,
each instruction and built-in function is covered in detail.  Of
particular interest, REXX arithmetic, PARSING, and TRACING
are covered in detail.  Part 2 concludes with a discussion on
reserved words, special variables, and error messages.  When
error messages are discussed, a sample of code that could cause
the message is shown.

Part 3 closes the book with a six-page discussion of various
REXX implementations.  CMS, TSO, YMS, and a PC version are
discussed.

In my opinion, this book is a wonderful addition to the standard
IBM supplied documentation.  I do not see it replacing the IBM
documentation, but providing an excellent explanation of it.

In the preface of this book Mike Cowlishaw recommends the
companion volume, Modern Programming using REXX, as a
general introduction to the language.  This 218-page book is
intended to be a guide to programming in REXX, not so much a
reference to the language itself.  Chapter 1 deals with what REXX
is and gives a little of its history.  The remainder of the book deals
with programming.  The format is that of a textbook, with many
examples and sample problems to be worked by the reader.  The
reader is encouraged to write his own program to accomplish the
desired task, then a discussion follows, with details and examples
on how that task could have been accomplished.  Questions and
problems are given at the end of each chapter.  The book stresses
the process of programming, as well as learning and writing
REXX code.  The subject of editor macros is well covered, and an
entire chapter is presented on sorting.  These two items were of
particular value to me.  The book concludes with two chapters on
advanced problems.  Two sample problems are chosen and these
are expanded on, using REXX to solve them.  Topics such as
boundary values and recursion are covered.  Several types of data
structure and their REXX implementations are covered.

This book may seem a little elementary if you are normally
involved in computer programming, but is still a valuable text on
REXX programming and worth reading.  For a new programmer
starting on REXX, or for a class that is to learn REXX as a
language, it would be quite a good text.

I have found that these two books discussed above, coupled with
the standard IBM documentation, can give a programmer more
than enough information to write good REXX code.

Editors note: for those people who are interested in reading books
about VM, I am aware of the following titles:

%   VM/CMS Handbook for Programmers, Users, and Managers
by Howard Fosdick, published by Hayden Books.

%   VM/CMS Commands and Concepts by Steve Eckols,
published by Mike Murach & Associates Ltd.

%   VM/CMS XEDIT Commands and Features by Steve Eckols,
published by Mike Murach & Associates Ltd.

%   VM and Departmental Computing by Gary McClain,
published by McGraw-Hill.

%   VM Applications Handbook edited by Gary McClain,
published by McGraw-Hill.

%   VM Performance Management by Trevor Eddolls, published
by McGraw-Hill.

Bruce Harrison Jr

Senior Systems Programmer/Analyst

University of Tennessee at Martin (USA) ) Xephon 1989



