Problems with GCS

GCS was introduced to allow SNA applications to run under VM
without requiring an additional guest operating system.
However, there are a number of unforeseen problems associated
with GCS, and some of these are described below.

%   The commands CP ADSTOP and CP TRACE should not be
used to trace execution through a GCS segment.  The reason
for this is that the two commands store special dummy
instructions in the machine's virtual storage, and other
machines in the group will come across these and will abend.
The solution is to use CP PER.

%   The directory entry for an autologged GCS machine must
contain:

         PARM AUTOLOG

    Otherwise the virtual console will be locked when an attempt
is made to reconnect to it.  If the problem does occur

         #CP ATTN

    can be entered to overcome it.

%   GCS treats filemode 4 files in the same manner as filemode 1
and 2 files.  The effect of this is that a mode 4 file created by
CMS or GCS cannot be read by the other.  No attempt should
be made to do this.

%   VMDUMP can be skipped without modifying GCS code by
setting a PER trap at the instruction before the X'83890094'
instruction.  This can be found by

         #CP D PSW

    while the dump is in progress.  CMD BEGIN xxxx is the
PER instruction, eg

         PER INSTR RANGE 417C4 RUN CMD B 417CE

%   In the event of GCS becoming corrupted and it needing to be
refreshed more needs to be done than simply re-IPLing the
recovery machine.  Although this procedure kills any GCS
machines still running, it does not delete the GCS segment
from the group.  This is because CP will hook the virtual
machine into the existing segment if it is currently part of any
virtual machine's virtual storage.  It is only when no virtual
machine has it that a new copy of GCS is brought from
DASD storage.  Therefore, to refresh GCS, all machines
must do SYSTEM CLEAR, IPL, or a LOGOFF before the
recovery machine is IPLed.

%   If either the EXTR or ECB operands are used with the
ATTACH command the task block and initial state block for
the task are kept until DETACHed by the parent task.  If the
parent task exits without issuing the DETACH command an
A03 abend occurs.

%   005 system abends can occur when I/O is performed to
RECFM VB files.  With variable block length files, records
and Record Descriptor Words (RDWs) are packed into a
buffer with a block descriptor word prefix.  For an I/O call,
GCS calculates the buffer length based on the maximum
buffer size in the DCB.  This ignores the prefix at the head of
the buffer.  If a GETMAIN is performed to obtain a buffer
for a record that is smaller than the maximum block size,
GCS checks the user's buffer for the maximum block length.
The consequence of this is that GCS looks beyond the buffer,
and may look into an adjacent page which has a different
storage key.

%   When a GETMAIN VC instruction is issued a minimum and
maximum amount of storage are specified.  If GCS cannot
allocate the maximum amount specified, it will allocate the
minimum.  With CMS, if the maximum is unavailable the
system will try to get the largest amount possible.  This
difference in the way that space is allocated can cause users
problems.

%   The JSTCB=YES parameter of the ATTACH macro makes a
subtask independent.  This option works only from the
COMMAND task.

    ) Xephon 1990

