Article of the Year Awards

Starting with 1989, Xephon has instituted an Article of the
Year Award.  A prize is given for the article published during
each year that saved individual readers of VM Update the most
time, and the article that saved readers' organizations most
money.  The prize for the author of the winning article in each
category is $2000 (#1250).

The awards were introduced, firstly, to give public recognition
to those authors who have helped their fellow system
programmers most, and, secondly, to enable us to tailor the
contents of VM Update more exactly to the needs of our
subscribers - by publishing more of the types of article that
were selected as being of most benefit to our readers.

Survey forms were sent back from nine countries, with well
over half (58%) coming from the USA.  On average, each
person who took part in the survey voted twenty times.  The
average was nine votes in the 'dollars saved' category, and
eleven votes in the 'time saved' category.  (Respondents may
have found it easier to account for their own time than to assess
the amount of money that their organization saved.)  It was
gratifying, when looking at the results, to find that every article
printed in VM Update last year was considered to have been of
some value to our readers.  The types of article that in general
attracted more of the votes were those dealing with real life
experiences, performance hints and tips, time management,
and coping with the perennial problem of the spool.

The issue of VM Update that received the most votes was the
February 1989 issue which received just over 11 percent of the
votes cast for money saved, and just under 11.5 percent of the
votes cast for time saved.  It also received 11.25 percent of all
the votes cast.  On average, each issue of VM Update saves
each site $320.  This gives a total saving for all subscribers of
over $3 million per year.  The average amount of time that
each issue saves each site is 4.25 hours, although one article
alone was estimated to have saved one site 60 hours.  This
gives a total saving in time for all subscribers of 94 452 hours
(or just under 4000 days) per year.

The article that received the most votes in terms in saving
readers' time was Why you should use 'Address COMMAND',
by Dave Fraatz.  This article received nearly 3.5% of all votes
cast for saving time.

Three articles got the same maximum number of votes for
amount of money saved (with just over 2.5% of the vote each).
These were I/O and performance written by J Phillips,
Displaying spool space from George Perkins, and Restarting
inactive RSCS lines by Frank Tramontano.

The article that received the maximum number of votes
altogether (ie the number of votes in each category were
summed for each article) was also Why you should use
'Address COMMAND' by Dave Fraatz.  This article attracted
2.9% of all the votes cast.

The prizes are awarded to the articles that saved the most
money or time.  Although these articles received slightly fewer
votes, the voters  specified larger savings in money, or time.
The article that was considered by readers of VM Update to
have saved the most money overall was Displaying spool space
written by George Perkins, Senior Technical Services
Specialist with Oscar Meyer Foods Corporation in the USA.
This article was published in the February issue, and on
average this saved all subscribers who sent in a voting slip
$113.16.  The article that was considered to have saved the
most time was Diary and calendar utility from William Cook, a
Systems Programmer with Smith Kline & French Laboratories
Ltd in the UK.  This article was published in the July issue,
and on average this saved all subscribers who sent in a voting
slip 1.4 hours.

We congratulate George Perkins and William Cook, and their
$2000 (#1250) prizes are currently on the way to them.  We
would like to take this opportunity to thank all the readers of
VM Update who took the time to fill in the survey form, and
would especially like to thank all the people who take time to
contribute articles to VM Update, but who, unfortunately,
cannot all be prize winners.  If you wish to contribute an
article, but are unsure how to do it, please contact the editor,
Trevor Eddolls, at any of the addresses shown on page 2, for a
free copy of our Notes for contributors.

