Designing a VM system DASD layout (continued)

This month we publish the second part of this article which
discusses the concept of a 'system-only' SYSRES pack, and
explains the possible benefits to be gained from this in the areas of
installation and maintenance and recovery procedures.

'SYSTEM-ONLY' SYSRES

It is recommended that you try to maintain your VM system
residence pack (SYSRES) as a system-only pack.  This means that
you should attempt to keep only areas and mini-disks that are
regarded as system areas on the SYSRES.  Figure 1 gives a rough
guide as to what is usually regarded as a system area and what is
not:

Obviously, not every mini-disk that is available to a VM system is
listed above, but the list should give a fairly good idea of what is
regarded as a system disk.  Note that some types of disk are marked
with a '*' or a '#'.  The difference between these disks is that even
though they are all 'systemish' those marked with a '*' are rarely
updated, whereas the ones marked '#' are very frequently updated.

The reason for separating these is explained below.
There are two very good reasons for trying to maintain a SYSRES
pack as system only.  These are ease of installation, and ease of
maintenance and error recovery.

Ease of installation

With SYSRES set up as a system-only pack, the installation and
testing of a new VM system becomes so much easier.  So too is the
final cutover from an old version of the system to a new one.

Assuming that you have a spare 3380 on which to perform the
installation (usually a D-box or an E-box is sufficient), you can
install the whole new VM system on the one pack.  Testing the new
system at first level can be done by simply attaching the old
system's user packs (via HCPSYS) to the new test system and
IPLing from the new SYSRES.  If you copy the VMUSERS

DIRECT source file over to the new MAINT's work disk, you will
find that very little tailoring would be required to allow all CMS
users to log-on and test the new level of VM if they wish.
The old SYSRES can remain unattached and unused during testing
and, therefore, protected from any possibility of damage or
corruption.  When the new system is to be put into production, the
same changes should be made as when the testing was done, and
the new system is IPLed from the new SYSRES.  The old SYSRES
then becomes immediately available for use by either VM or
perhaps one of the guest systems running under it.  If the old
SYSRES had some user  mini-disks on it, it would have been
necessary to migrate all those disks onto other VM packs allocated
to the new system before the disk could be freed up for other use.

Ease of maintenance and error recovery

With a SYSRES as system-only, you will also find that the
application, testing and back-out of VM service, and recovery of
the SYSRES itself, will become less of a headache.  This also
applies to the recovery from unexpected problems on the SYSRES
(such as a head crash).  Admittedly, the new service procedures
under VM/XA SP go some way to automating the VM service
process, but you can complement these with your own failsafe
procedures.

If you create your SYSRES as system-only, you will find that the
back-out procedure for applying maintenance can be swift and
totally effective.  This is particularly useful if the service you have
just applied prevents the VM system from IPLing!
With a SYSRES as system-only, you simply need to back-up the
SYSRES prior to applying the VM maintenance.  If the service fails
to correct a minor known problem, it is perhaps advisable to re-IPL
the system and remove the fix via normal methods.  If however the
fix was applied incorrectly or for some other reason it renders the
VM system un-IPLable, the normal procedure is to restore the old
nucleus and remove the service manually.  This procedure may not
be quick enough.  As nothing on the SYSRES is likely to have
changed since the precautionary back-up was taken, it would be far
simpler (and cheaper in system programmer time) to restore the
whole SYSRES pack from the back-up.  This would correct the
nucleus and remove the offending service as well.

Under the old method, to protect against possible restore problems
with the back-up copy of the nucleus, it was sometimes necessary
to take two precautionary copies of the nucleus before applying
service.  If there was a problem with the restore, and only one
back-up copy had been taken, the nucleus would have to be
restored from an older back-up which could then be out of date.

If the SYSRES is maintained as system-only, only one
precautionary back-up of the whole pack would be necessary.  If
the restore failed, an old copy of the SYSRES taken during regular
back-ups could be used.  It is unlikely that any data on the SYSRES
would have changed (except maintenance) and it will not,
therefore, be backdated.  Be careful though not to remove
maintenance that has been applied correctly.

SPOOL areas are not listed as system in Figure 1.  By keeping
spool files off the SYSRES, you will ensure that spool files are not
lost or backdated by this method of recovery.  PAGE areas are
dynamic, do not need to be carried over from one IPL to the next,
and can therefore be safely placed on the SYSRES pack.  (This is
possible only if the balance of I/Os is not affected by increasing I/O
to the SYSRES in proportion to I/Os to the other packs.)

It is not suggested that this method should always be used to back-
out VM service.  Instead, by making the SYSRES a system-only
pack, you will be complementing the current back-out procedures
by providing one more option to choose when carrying out a back-
out or emergency recovery.

Similarly in the case of an 'unexpected' problem with the SYSRES
pack, such as a head crash, an old back-up copy can be used
without the likelihood of backdating too much (if any) data on the
pack.
Phil Driver (UK)                                          ) Xephon 1990


