How efficiently do you use your disks?

Many sites consider installing new DASD because they think
that their existing ones are filling up.  However, it is usually
worth further investigation to see if this is the case.  Before
discussing how efficiently disks are used at a typical VM site,
it is worth looking at how space is allocated on those disks.

Real disk packs are formatted into mini-disks.  With EDF
(Enhanced Disk Format), mini-disks are formatted with blocks
that can be 512 bytes, 1KB, 2KB, or 4KB in size.  Users are
allocated mini-disks which they use to store files on.  Users do
not need to specify, at any time, the amount of space that a file
on a mini-disk will occupy.  Space for the file is obtained in
two ways: when a file is opened; and, as required, when the
file is written to.  Space is allocated to the file in blocks.
When all the space in a block is used, another block is obtained
for the file.

VM maintains a File Allocation Map (FAM), which has a bit
for the status of each block on a mini-disk.  Also, for each file,
there is a File Status Table Block (FSTB), which contains
pointers to all the blocks assigned to that file.  If more space is
required by a file, a free block is found from the FAM, and the
block is allocated to the file.  The FAM and the FSTB must
both be updated appropriately.  If lots of data is added to a file,
enlarging it, the FAM and FSTB are updated frequently.  To
make the process more efficient these control blocks are kept in
storage.

The only limitation to the amount of space that a user's file can
occupy on disk is more or less the size of the largest mini-disk
that the user has allocated.  Once the file reaches the end of the
mini-disk, it cannot get blocks from anywhere else, so it cannot
grow.  This is fine if the growth of the file is to be restricted,
but a problem otherwise.  It is no easy task to enlarge a mini-
disk.  In fact, the common practice is to create a new mini-disk
and copy the data to it.

Allocation of space on a mini-disk is fairly efficient because
only the amount of space required is allocated.  Any extra is
left unused.  This system, also, allows all the blocks on a mini-
disk to be used, which is efficient space management.
However, performance can be impaired because the blocks
used by a file could be anywhere on the mini-disk, and this
fragmentation can lead to degraded performance.  The other
big disadvantage is that the mini-disks themselves have to be
allocated to a user-id first.

It has been estimated that two-thirds of disk space at a typical
site is allocated to mini-disks, with the rest being left unused.
This average is similar to averages found for the allocation of
disk space with other operating systems.  Unfortunately, the
picture is not quite that good because mini-disks allocated to a
user are meant to last that user a long time.  This means, in
effect, that space must be left free for the likely future
requirements of that user.  Surveys have found that, on
average, only 50 percent of each mini-disk is used.  In other
words, only half of the two-thirds of the disk pack at a site is
used, ie 33 percent.

Therefore, before any new disk drives are ordered, the capacity
planners at a site should ensure that the other two-thirds of the
available space on a disk is used first.

J Phillips (UK)

