Article of the Year Awards

Since 1989, Xephon has offered Article of the Year Awards.
These prizes are given for the article published during the
previous year that saved individual readers of VM Update the
most time, and the article that saved readers' organizations
most money.  The prize for the author of the winning article in
each category is $2000 ($1250).

The awards were introduced, firstly, to give public recognition
to those authors who have helped their fellow system
programmers most, and, secondly, to enable us to tailor the
contents of VM Update more exactly to the needs of our
subscribers - by publishing more of the types of article that
were selected as being of most benefit to our readers.  Last
year's winners were George Perkins, for an article entitled
Displaying spool space, and William Cook, for an article
entitled Diary and calendar utility.

Survey forms were sent back from ten countries, with just over
a third (38%) coming from the USA.  On average, each person
who took part in the survey voted seventeen times.  The
average was eight votes in the 'dollars saved' category, and nine
votes in the 'time saved' category.  (Respondents may have
found it slightly easier to account for their own time than to
assess the amount of money that their organization saved.)  It
was gratifying, when looking at the results, to find that every
article printed in VM Update last year was considered to have
been of some value to our readers.  The types of article that in
general attracted more of the votes were those dealing with real
life experiences, performance hints and tips, time management,
and coping with the perennial problem of the spool.

The issue of VM Update that received the most votes in the
'dollars saved' category was the July 1990 issue which received
just under 13 percent of the votes cast for money saved. The
issue that received the most votes in the 'time saved' category
was the April 1990 issue.  It also received just under 13 percent
of the votes cast for time saved.  On average, each issue of VM
Update saves each site $392.  This gives a total saving for all
subscribers of over $8.7 million per year.  The average amount
of time that each issue saves each site is 6.95 hours.  This
gives a total saving in time for all subscribers of 154 359 hours
(or just under 6431 days) per year.

The articles that received the most votes in terms in saving
readers' time were Designing a VM system DASD layout, by
Phil Driver, and Display virtual device and I/O count, by Pat
Tierce.  These articles each received nearly 2.7% of all votes
cast for saving time.

The article that got the same maximum number of votes for
amount of money saved (with just over 2.7% of the vote) was
Improving the performance of REXX programs by Adrian
Blakey.

These articles also received the maximum number of votes
altogether (ie the number of votes in each category were
summed for each article).

However, the prizes are awarded to the articles that saved the
most money or time.  Although the winning articles received
slightly fewer votes than the runners up, the voters  specified
larger savings in money, or time.  The article that was
considered by readers of VM Update to have saved the most
money overall was T3380 mapping utility written by Maurice
Smyth, Senior Systems Programmer with Frank Russell
Company in the USA.  This article was published in the
February issue, and on average it saved all subscribers who
sent in a voting slip $78.13.  The article that was considered to
have saved the most time was Finding the reason for a VSE
program check  from Kurt Pilchowski, a Systems Programmer
from Germany.  This article was published in the July issue,
and on average it saved all subscribers who sent in a voting slip
2.5 hours.

We congratulate Maurice Smyth and Kurt Pilchowski, and their
$2000 ($1250) prizes are currently on the way to them.  We
would like to take this opportunity to thank all the readers of
VM Update who took the time to fill in the survey form, and
would especially like to thank all the people who take time to
contribute articles to VM Update, but who, unfortunately,
cannot all be prize winners.  If you wish to contribute an
article, but are unsure how to do it, please contact the editor,
Trevor Eddolls, at any of the addresses shown on page 2, for a
free copy of our Notes for contributors.
