VM/XA SP 2.1 alternate nucleus support

If you're a VM/SP HPO 5 shop like ours, converting to
VM/XA SP 2.1 will probably be not be as easy as it was going
from VM/SP to HPO.

As you may know by now, there is no alternate CP nucleus
support provided by VM/XA SP 2.1.  After some tinkering
(and losing the SPOOL area once), I've come up with a pretty
acceptable alternative to doing an SPTAPE DUMP/LOAD
before/after an IPL - and we all know how long that takes.
There are some security exposures, so beware if you're in a
shop with tight security requirements.

The requirement is that the CKPT and WARM cylinders reside
at the same cylinder location as the currently IPLed system,
and that the SYSCPVOL order isn't changed in the new nucleus
(unless the change is after the SPOOL volume(s)).  I haven't
tried it, but it shouldn't matter what cylinder the nucleus starts
at on the volume.

Our particular procedure goes like this:

1      The operator shuts down all software except VMSECURE
      (from Systems Center).

2      Make sure all virtual machines except VMSECURE and
      OPERATOR are logged off to make sure all spool files
      (with the exception of OPERATOR and VMSECURE) will
      be intact.

3      LINK, in write mode, to the current IPL volume and the
      new IPL volume from the OPERATOR user-id.  The mini-
      disks that the OPERATOR LINKs to should entirely cover
      the WARM/CKPT cylinders on both volumes.  Make sure
      the cylinder numbers are the same - ie if the
      WARM/CKPT cylinders are consecutive (like ours)
      running from cylinders 45-60, then both volumes
      CKPT/WARM cylinders should be at cylinders 45-60.  If
      you fail to locate them at the same cylinder numbers, you'll
      lose the SPOOL when you IPL the system from the new
      IPL volume.

4      Use DDRXA in the OPERATOR virtual machine to COPY
      the cylinders from the current IPL volume to the new IPL
      volume.

5      SHUTDOWN the CP.

6      IPL from your new IPL volume.

7      Use FORCE to start the system since the WARM/CKPT
      cylinders were not completed by a normal SHUTDOWN.

After performing these steps, you'll be back up on an alternate
CP nucleus.  Remember, you'll lose the OPERATOR and
VMSECURE spool files that were open when you performed
the DDR (unless you shut-down VMSECURE before
performing the DDR step).

We let our operations staff perform these steps so that the
systems programmers do not have to come in to perform them,
and to eliminate the need to do these functions stand-alone on
the real machine (although that would work fine too).  Either
approach will do the job.

The benefits of this are:

o      You get an alternate nucleus without having to SPTAPE DUMP/LOAD.

o      The systems programmer need not come in.

o      You don't need to DDR DUMP your current nucleus.  It's
      still where it always was.  If your new nucleus doesn't ¨
      work, you just instruct your operators to re-IPL using the old one.

The drawbacks are:

o      Security/integrity exposure allowing the operators access to
      the CKPT/WARM cylinders.

o      Not supported by IBM.


CONCLUSIONS

If you need/want alternate nucleus support in VM/XA, this is
an absolute must.  It offers the ability to test new nuclei, and
offers the ability to have a disaster recovery mechanism in case
you lose your primary SYSRES.  I'm sure there are other
reasons for wanting to do this as well.

Pat Tierce
Systems Software Specialist (USA)
