Mailing utility

FNBNOTES is a fullscreen 'electronic' mailing utility that is
easier and more effective than the IBM-supplied NOTE utility.
It was developed under VM/XA SP1 with CMS 5.5.  Little or
no change should be necessary for it to run under VM/SP 4
upwards or VM/XA SP1 upwards.

It comprises 11 files - seven REXX EXECs and four REXX
XEDIT macros.  By all means customize the inherent panels to
suit your shop, but if you're going to change the utility file-ids
take great care to change all  references to a particular file in
the other files as well.

To benefit from the restricted user feature, ie to ensure that
notes aren't sent to certain specified virtual machines such as
OPERATOR, MVS, AUTOLOG1, you will need to amend D-
LNOTEV EXEC.  Do this in the section that follows the label
'RESTRICTED_USERS:' after the comments; duplicate/delete
lines to include the virtual machines you wish to restrict.

Assuming that you will want all CMS users to use this utility,
place the 11 utility files on a commonly accessed mini-disk.

In the file NOTEPF6 XEDIT there are five EXECIO references
to a file called D-LNOTEV EXEC F.  In our installation the
EXECs and macros have been placed on the F disk (our
common disk).  You will have to change the F on these five
lines to match the filemode of the disk that you place these 11
files on.  For example, if you place all the files on a disk that
all CMS users access as C, the five references to

D-LNOTEV EXEC F should be changed to D-LNOTEV EXEC C.


WHAT IS FNBNOTES?

FNBNOTES is a fullscreen 'electronic' mailing system.  It is
used to create notes to send to other CMS users who in turn
will use FNBNOTES to interrogate notes that they receive.
There is already an IBM-supplied NOTE facility, which is
mildly similar to FNBNOTES; however, it is fairly basic and
crude.

FNBNOTES has a number of features and capabilities:

o      FNBNOTES is purely PF key driven; it uses PF keys 1 to
      12 with support for PF 13 to PF 24.

o      FNBNOTES has support for colour terminals.

o      FNBNOTES utilizes a fullscreen 'notes-list' panel for easy
      note management.

o      A single note can be sent simultaneously to a number of
      different CMS users by specifying one or more distribution
      list names.


HOW TO USE FNBNOTES

To invoke FNBNOTES, simply type 'fnbnotes'.

You will see an opening panel instructing you to 'HIT ENTER
TO CONTINUE'.  At this point any notes that have been sent
to you are processed.  Whether or not you have any new notes
you will then go into the 'notes-list' panel shown in Figure 1.


THE 'NOTES-LIST' PANEL

The 'notes-list' panel contains information about the notes you
have.  The top line shows:

o      Who you are (TAH).
o      Today's date (28/01/90).
o      How many notes are in your possession (5).
o      What line you are on, relative to the top (1).

The second line lists the headings, and lines three to 21 show
information pertinent to the individual notes you have received.
There are five different types of 'Status':

o      NEW - This means that you have simply received this note
      but have not read/edited it yet.

o      OPENED - This means that you have read/edited a note
      that was NEW.  The status of OPENED will stay the same
      after subsequent reading/editing.

o      CREATE - This indicates that this is a note that you have
      written with a view to sending it at some time or other.

o      REPLY - This is the same as OPENED except that the note
      you have read/edited requires a reply.  As with OPENED
      the status will stay the same with subsequent
      reading/editing.

o      SENT - This indicates that the note in question has been
      sent to its respective CMS users.  This is purely to show
      you what has been sent and what hasn't.

'Title' - is simply the title of each note.

'Size' - is the number of lines in the note.

'From' - is who sent you the note.  On notes with a status of
CREATE, 'From' will be your own CMS user-id.

'Date' - is the date that the note was first received or created.

'Time' - is the time that the note was first received or created.

Lines 22 and 23 show what the PF key settings are.  For PF4,
PF6, PF11 and PF12 you need to move the cursor to the
required note first.  The other PF keys operate regardless of
cursor position.

Line 24 displays informational/error messages.


USING THE PF KEYS

PF1 or PF13 - Create

PF1 is used to create a new note, which you will later wish to
send to one or more CMS users.  PF1 can be used regardless of
where the cursor is, and hitting PF1 will display the next panel
(see Figure 2).

From here you can hit PF3 to return to the 'notes-list' if you
wish or continue to create the new note.

Assuming you wish to continue to create a new note, first write
the title you want for the note in the space provided (35
alphanumeric characters maximum).  For example:

      Hi there, this is a valid title

In the second field, type the CMS user-id(s) or D-name(s) that
the note is to go to.  D-names are discussed in more detail later
under PF5's description.  Examples of valid entries are:

      TAH
      TGAS
      D-PROG
      TAH TGAS D-PROG D-TEST

The third, and final, line requires a 'Y' or an 'N' (default is 'N')
to the question of whether you require a reply to your note.  If
you do require a reply, type a 'Y'; this will cause the note,
when read by the recipient(s), to have a status of REPLY.  If
you don't want a reply to your note then leave the 'N' that is
already there.  This will cause the note to have a status of
OPENED, when read.

You must answer all three questions in the panel to continue.
After answering all three questions and hitting ENTER you will
be put in XEDIT mode in a file called 'user-id FNMAIL1 A'.
(See Figure 3.)

The information you enter in the note creation panel is
transferred to this file.  You are now in ordinary XEDIT mode;
your PF keys are now what they normally are when you
XEDIT a file.

Starting anywhere below the dotted line on line 14 you can
write your note/memo.  The message 'WRITE YOUR MEMO
FROM HERE.' is there only to remind you of the approximate
position for you to start writing and it should be overwritten.

As with normal XEDIT, issue a 'FILE' on the command line
when you have finished.  You will then be returned to the
'notes-list' panel where your new note will be at the top with a
status of CREATE.

PF2 or PF14 - Receive

If you press PF2, any notes that have been sent to you since
your entry into FNBNOTES will be received and you will be
moved to the top of your 'notes-list'.  If you don't have any new
notes to receive you will stay where you are in 'notes-list' and a
message 'No new NOTE(S) received' will be displayed.

PF3 or PF15 - Quit

PF3 allows you to leave FNBNOTES  and return to CMS.

PF4 or PF16 - Delete

Use PF4 to delete a note from the 'notes-list'.  First, move the
cursor to the note you wish to delete and then hit PF4.  The
following message will appear at the bottom of the screen:

      To confirm and execute hit PF4 again, or hit ENTER to
      stop DELETE operation.

Therefore, if you are sure you want to delete this note, hit PF4
again; if you are not sure hit ENTER and the DELETE
operation will be cancelled.

You are not allowed to delete notes with the following status:

o      NEW - you have to read/edit them first (PF11).

o      REPLY -  this note requires a reply and therefore cannot be
      deleted.  When you have replied, the status becomes
      SENT, which you can delete.  See PF6, below, on how to
      reply to a note with a status of REPLY.

PF5 or PF17 - D-List

PF5 is used to update your distribution list file if you have one,
or to create one if you haven't.  The distribution list file
comprises a summary telling you how to use it, followed by
definitions that you set up.  The name of the file will be D-
LNOTES user-id A1, which is XEDITed by hitting PF5.

Figure 4 shows an example of a distribution list file.  I have
omitted from the Figure lines 3 to 33 inclusive, which contain
this summary.

It should be noted that the first 37 lines (non-user area) must
not be altered or deleted, otherwise unexpected results may
occur.  Your definitions may start anywhere from line 38.

Writing definitions has the following restrictions:

o      All D-names must start in column 1 and begin with 'D-'
      followed by up to six alphanumeric characters.

o      All lines (except blank lines) must begin with a D-name.

o      Valid CMS users listed must start in column 11, or higher,
      and be separated by blanks.

o      If more than one line is required to list all the CMS users
      you require, code these subsequent lines with the same D-
      name as the first line (eg D-PROG in Figure 4).

o      There is no limit to the number of D-names used or CMS
      users per D-name, except storage limits.

o      Blank lines are ignored but are recommended to aid
      readability.

o      The distribution list file, if created, can have no entries at
      all if you so wish.

When you have finished writing your definitions, type 'FILE'
on the command line.  Before you are returned to your 'notes-
list', syntax checks are run against your distribution list.  If the
list is wrong you will be told and should hit PF5 again to go
into your list and make the necessary changes, then type
'FILE'.  Every time you use PF5 these checks are performed.
Some user-ids are restricted, eg OPERATOR.  If you add a
restricted user under a D-name you will be asked to remove it.

PF6 or PF18 - Send

To SEND a note, move the cursor to the required note and hit
PF6.  The note is sent to the CMS users or D-names specified
in the note itself.  However, the utility checks two things first:

o      That all the specified CMS users exist and are not
      restricted.

o      That all D-names are correctly specified in the distribution-
      list file.

If any of these checks fail, the SEND is aborted and you will
be told why; you should then correct the error and retry sending
the note.

Assuming both checks are all right, PF6 then performs four
more functions:

o      The note is sent to all specified CMS user-ids and/or user-
      ids specified under a D-name.  If a user-id is specified
      more than once in the same note, that user-id will still
      receive only one copy.

o      A message is sent to all the specified users telling them
      that you have sent them a note as well as what action to
      take to receive it.

o      The status of the note is changed to SENT.  (If the status
      was already SENT, ie you've sent the note before, it
      remains the same.)

o      You will get a message saying 'The NOTE has been sent
      successfully'.

If you have a note with a status of REPLY, it means that the
person who sent you the note wants that note replied to.  To do
this first edit the note (PF11).  Then either delete the actual text
of the note (not the first 13 header lines) and write your reply,
or go to the bottom of the note and add your reply.  Then type
'FILE' on the command line and you will be returned to the
'notes-list'.  Making sure that the cursor is next to the note you
have just edited and hit PF6.  In this instance PF6 sends the
note back to the person who sent it to you in the first place.

This is the only time you don't have to concern yourself with
who the note has to go to.  This is because it had a status of
REPLY, and PF6 recognizes this and takes care of
destinations.  The status of REPLY will change to SENT and
the note can be deleted.  Only notes with a status of CREATE
or REPLY can be SENT.

PF7 or PF19 - Backward

PF7 scrolls your notes backward one screen if you have 20
notes or more and you are not at the top.  If you are already at
the top or you have fewer than 20 notes, nothing happens.

This article will be continued next month.

Adam Helman
Systems Programmer
First National Bank plc (UK)                   c First National Bank plc 1991

