Article of the Year Awards

Since 1989, Xephon has offered Article of the Year Awards.
These prizes are given for the article published during the
previous year that saved individual readers of VM Update the
most time, and the article that saved readers' organizations
most money. The prize for the author of the winning article in
each category is $2,000.

The awards were introduced, firstly, to give public recognition
to those authors who have helped their fellow systems
programmers most, and, secondly, to enable us to tailor the
contents of VM Update more exactly to the needs of our
subscribers - by publishing more of the type of articles that
were selected as being of most benefit to our readers. Last
year's winners were Maurice Smyth, for an article entitled
T3380 mapping utility, and Kurt Pilchowski, for an article
entitled Finding the reason for a VSE program check.

Survey forms were sent back from twelve countries, with just
over a third (35.4%) coming from the USA. On average each
issue of VM Update is read by just over 3 people (mean
average is 3.3) with just over 4.6% of sites saying that each
issue is read by ten or more people. Nearly a quarter (23%) of
readers considered that VM Update was too short, with no-one
thinking that it was too long.

On average, the survey found that each site uses 7.5 articles or
routines derived from VM Update. It also found that just over
half (53%) of its subscribers use the bulletin board, and those
sites access the board an average of 6.6 times a year. Just over
half the sites in the survey considered that an article in VM
Update had allowed them to do without a bought-in software
package. Nearly three-quarters (72.2%) of sites thought that
VM Update saved end user time, while 80% of sites considered
that it saved Technical Support time, and 68% thought that
operator time was saved. Nearly a third of sites (31%) thought
that VM Update reduced the amount of downtime, and a
similar number of sites thought VM Update reduced the need
for external consultants and support services etc.

The issue of VM Update that received the most votes in terms
of 'money saved' was the January 1991 issue which received
over 16 percent of all the votes cast. It also received the most
votes in terms of 'hours saved' with nearly 16 percent.

On average, each issue of VM Update saves each site $178.
This gives a total saving for all subscribers of nearly $3 million
per year. The average amount of time that each issue saves
each site is around 6.6 hours. This gives a total saving in time
for all subscribers of 111,546 hours (or just over 4,647 days)
per year.

The article that was considered by readers of VM Update to
have saved the most money overall was Establishing a
secondary user-id by Pat Tierce from the March issue. The
article, on average, saved all subscribers who sent in a voting
slip $125. The article that was considered to have saved the
most time was PROFS to OfficeVision migration by Mary
Snyder published in the June issue. This article, on average,
saved all subscribers who sent in a voting slip 3.5 hours.

We congratulate Pat Tierce and Mary Snyder, and their $2000
prizes are currently on the way to them. We also thank all
those readers of VM Update who took the time to fill in a
survey form, and a special thank you is extended to all those
people who take time to contribute articles to VM Update. If
you would like to contribute an article, but are unsure how to
do it, please contact Trevor Eddolls, at any of the addresses
shown on page 2, for a free copy of our Notes for contributors.
