Mouse control of mainframe 3270 applications

Until mainframe applications are written to exploit the power
of workstations and cooperative processing, millions of users
will spend their time interacting with traditional 3270-style
application screens. Older systems, sometimes called 'legacy
applications', can benefit greatly from more effective user
interfaces, but incremental re-design and re-implementation to
provide a modern interface can be prohibitively expensive.

A little-known IBM product, CM Mouse Support/2, can
provide a modern and effective mouse-driven user interface
with no application changes. CM Mouse makes 3270 host
applications look and feel like PC applications by supporting
mouse interactions and pop-up menus. It allows the definition
of mouse buttons as tailorable sequences of up to 255 host
keystrokes and terminal actions, including PF keys or special
application and terminal emulator keys. For example, to open
OfficeVision mail, a user can 'point and click' the Mail
Waiting indicator.

CM Mouse can be programmed to navigate complex menu
paths, screen data entry, and PF key sequences with one click
of a mouse button. CM Mouse can be configured to recognize
specific host application screens, and re-define mouse button
functions accordingly. For example, a mouse button can invoke
one function on a RDRLIST screen and another on an
OfficeVision screen. Users can construct pop-up menus to
appear over host application screens which dynamically present
lists of choices appropriate for each screen. It allows mouse
interactions to:

o      Invoke pop-up menus on host windows for task initiation
      or data entry

o      Position mouse on host application word, number, or PF
      key and invoke the appropriate action

o      Open mail by placing the mouse on the Mail Waiting indicator

o      Select day from monthly calendar for the daily calendar display

o      Save notes in file cabinet or notelog

o      Print notes and documents

o      Download and upload files

o      Use OS/2 clipboard to cut/copy/paste text to or from host screens.

CM Mouse can be customized with a simple control panel,
pop-up menus, and an OS/2 text editor. It does not require
knowledge of PC keyboard scan codes or any programming
languages. It includes debugging tools such as host screen
mappers and analysers, along with sample scripts which can be
customized for specific application screens and users.

Release 2 of CM Mouse, made available near year-end 1991, added:

o      Support for 5250 applications on the AS/400.

o      Screen map function which graphically displays screen
      sub-areas and button definitions associated with each. This
      quickly illustrates the assignment of host application
      functions to mouse buttons.

o      Double- and multiple-press (chord) button selections. This
      allows a total of six button definitions for a two-button
      mouse and 12 definitions for a three-button mouse.

o      An interface to the OS/2 REXX programming language,
      which allows mouse buttons to perform complex tasks with
      the power of a general-purpose programming language.
      REXX programs can be easily integrated into CM Mouse
      button definitions.

Unfortunately, CM Mouse is a PRPQ, which makes it slightly
obscure and hard to order. As a PRPQ, it was not announced in
the normal stream of IBM product news, and it is not described
in mainstream sources such as IBMLink. Its program number is
5799-PNJ; it costs $150 for the first copy and $78 for
additional copies. A one-page description is available as G221-
3209. It presently supports only OS/2 EE, although IBM has
indicated a willingness to consider providing a DOS version. It
can provide an economical method for 'refacing' critical
applications, allowing them to look and feel like PC
applications with point-and-shoot and pop-up menu
productivity.


Gabe Goldberg
Consultant (USA)

