Communications options under VM/VSE - part 2

This month we conclude the article looking at communications
options under VM and VSE.


NET/MASTER

Net/Master is a network and system management package
developed by Software Developments International and
marketed internationally by Systems Center.

Net/Master provides Advanced Network Management function
through the use of five modules:

o      Multiple Application Interface (MAI)

o      Operator Control Services (OCS)

o      Network Control Language (NCL)

o      Network Error Warning System (NEWS)

o      Net/Master activity log.

MAI allows a user to have sessions with multiple subsystems
(CMS, CICS, etc) simultaneously from the one terminal. The
user can 'jump' between sessions using PF/PA/ATTN keys.

OCS provides a simple to use yet comprehensive 'window' for
control of the network. Frequently used commands can be
programmed to PF keys. A 'stack' of commands is kept which
can be searched for previous commands. 'Equates' can be set
up in order to abbreviate commands. Many other useful and
powerful functions are also available using OCS.

NCL is a fourth generation interpretive language which is
oriented towards network operations. Using NCL, it is possible
to develop procedures which will observe a network fault, take
action to rectify the fault, and then notify the network operator.
Fullscreen panels can also be presented by NTS.

NEWS provides access to all errors and statistics in the
network delivered by the CNM interface. NEWS is a menu
driven system which can be used to obtain and display
statistical information on the performance of the system.

Activity logging is carried out by Net/Master for all network
activity (both VTAM and Net/Master). The log file can be
browsed on-line to check on network related events.

Net/Master also supports other features including the File
Transfer System, which is a fast and efficient means of
transferring data host-to-host or host-to-PC. The Session
Replay Facility (SRF) allows authorized users the ability to
trace all session activity on a terminal. Advanced Operation
Manager (AOM) is a highly effective means of automating
operations. Inter-Net/Master Connection (INMC) allows a
single operation to control terminals on a remote network (ie on
another CPU).


LOCAL AREA NETWORKS

A LAN is usually based around one or more server machines,
which hold the files, control the printer(s), and communicate
with a Wide Area Network (WAN) if necessary.

LANs come in a variety of forms. There are different
topologies and different protocols.

The common topologies are IBM Token Ring and Ethernet.
Both are in widespread use in SNA networks. Ethernet is a bus
(ie single data connection between each PC) LAN - all
workstations are connected to a bus.

Token Ring has the network in a ring formation as implied by
the name (ie there are two possible data connections between
each PC).

In general, Ethernet LANs are cheaper and simpler when just a
few workstations are involved.

The protocols are the software and rules used to control the
network. These are usually based on the OSI network
standards, and therefore can be regarded as 'open'. Common
ones are Novell NetWare, Banyan Vines, and Microsoft LAN
Manager. These control shared data and resources, to ensure
data integrity and security.

The workstation can be as flexible as required. It can have its
own hard disk and software, or diskettes only, or can even be
diskless. With a diskless workstation, data cannot be removed
and viruses (and games and pirated software) cannot be
introduced.

At the moment, although LANs are becoming well established
in IBM mainframe networks, the management functions are
still in their infancy. IBM's usual response is to use NetView
for management of a network if a mainframe is present. This
applies to networks containing AS/400s as well as LANs.

One standard for LAN management is SNMP, and various
hardware and software is being developed to support this. Any
type of equipment can send 'user' CNM records to NetView,
which can then act on them (once the necessary routines have
been developed of course).


APPC AND APPN

The emerging technologies for networking are based on APPC
and APPN. Let us review what these are.


APPC

Advanced Program to Program Communications (APPC)
allows two applications running on different platforms to
communicate with each other. The programmers use APPC
'verbs', thus they do not have to know about the intricacies of
the other system. Current IBM implementations include:

o      APPC/VM

o      APPC/MVS

o      APPC/400

o      APPC/PC

o      CICS and IMS.


APPN

Advanced Peer-to-Peer Networking (APPN) was developed to
supplement the hierarchical nature of SNA. Traditional SNA is
based around the SSCP - always implemented in VTAM.
Essentially it was a star shaped network. With multi-domain
networks, although sessions can exist between two LUs
anywhere in the network, the two associated VTAM systems
(the LU owners) are needed for session initiation and
termination. While this was acceptable (though not ideal) a few
years ago, clearly it is not now. However, the nature of SNA
allows extensions, so the APPN node - PU type 2.1 - was
developed.

This is commonly implemented in AS/400 systems or in LANs.
With APPN, the requirement of an SSCP for session initiation
is removed. Also, with APPN, there is a reduced amount of
network definition.

The latest announcements have extended APPN to allow a
more flexible approach to peer to peer networking, and allow
dumb 3270s to participate in LAN-based applications. In
addition, the changes that are being made to VTAM will mean
that the host will be able to participate in peer to peer networks
as a PU 2.1 rather than (or as well as) a PU 5.


SUMMARY

The drift from centralized solutions will gain momentum.
There will still be a need in many enterprises for a mainframe,
although it will become just a 'megaserver' in many cases.
This is borne out by the sort of software products that are
appearing in the VM and LAN connectivity area. These
include:

o      Workstation LAN File Services/VM (WLFS/VM), which
      makes VM appear as a large file server to OS/2, DOS, and
      TCP/IP NFS workstations.

o      LAN Resource Extension and Services/VM
      (LANRES/VM), which allows centralized management of
      NetWare LANs.

o      Workstation Data Save Facility/VM (WDSF/VM), which
      lets VM automatically back-up workstations without user
      intervention.

o      SAA Delivery Manager/VM, which allows centralized
      delivery and control of OS/2 programs (both IBM and non-IBM).

The move away to more workstation-based applications will
cause many IT departments to require reorganization to cope
with the changing requirements of their users. Considerations
will include:

o      Security - prevention of unauthorized access, copying of
      data, and introduction of viruses.

o      Policy - ensuring that the organization as a whole is
      pulling in the same direction and has a strategy for
      protocols, software, and hardware (both for support and
      volume purchasing reasons).

o      Help Desk - combining mainframe and PC support to
      reduce the number of people involved.

o      Capacity management - major changes in the emphasis of
      capacity management (not on CPU but on network capacity).

John Coe
Senior Consultant
RSM Consulting Ltd (UK)                              c John Coe 1992
