VM service application explained

VM system service installation can be very confusing to
newcomers because there have been so many different ways of
doing it since its starting point in the late 1960s, and there
seems to be a reluctance among systems programmers to
perform the activity.

The traditional systems programmer had a great understanding
of how the hardware and software at his site worked together.
He would have Assembler expertise, and would probably have
carried out a lot of work on VM to make the system fit the
requirements of the end users at his site. Because of this, and
because he was working with smaller processors, he knew
where to look for answers to problems. He also had more
confidence when it came to making changes or installing service.

The contemporary systems programmer does not have the same
depth of knowledge for a number of reasons, including:
systems are much more complex and therefore harder to learn
the details of; there are far more end users who cannot afford
the time spent while the computer system is down and the
systems programmer is taking dumps, identifying problems,
and making changes; processors are much more powerful,
which makes it harder to find the cause of a crash; and the
systems programmers themselves do not have the same amount
of time to spend tinkering with the system. The modern
systems programmer spends much of his time installing
packages. When a problem occurs he will call the vendor for
technical support rather than fix it himself. A consequence of
this is a reluctance to make any changes while the system is up
and running well, and this includes the installation of service
that might cause the system to not work as expected.

Typically, every few months IBM sent out a Program Update
Tape (PUT) containing fixes (PTFs - Program Temporary
Fixes) for reported problems. They also contained PEs (PTFs
in Error), and all the service up to that date on it - SLUs
(Service Level Updates). Later a PUT bucket would be
produced containing fixes or code necessary for the PUT to
work. There was lots of reading associated with the bucket so
the systems programmer could decide which parts to apply.
Experienced systems programmers learned not to apply a PUT
tape until it had been tested and problems reported were fixed
and put in the PUT bucket. However, if most people waited for
the bucket, no one was finding the faults!

It was not unknown for bug-fixes sent out by IBM to contain
problems. Many systems programmers can tell stories of
applying fixes to fixes. It has also been known for two different
fixes on the same PUT tape to conflict with each other. These
reasons have often deterred systems programmers from
installing fixes.

As a consequence of sites not applying service to their VM
system, they often reported to IBM problems which had a fix
in a later service that was sitting on the programmer's desk. If
service is not regularly applied at a site, the expertise in
applying service atrophies.

Not only were VMers lacking in enthusiasm about installing
service, many of them were seriously reluctant about installing
new releases. Many sites found VM/SP 4.2 fitted their needs,
and they were not prepared to migrate to Version 5.

While there may have been a reluctance to install new releases
and service levels of VM/SP and HPO, those systems
programmers that were interested and had the time could look
at the Assembler code and make any on-site mods that they
required. With VM/XA came Object Code Only (OCO). The
advantage of source code updates is that they are small. If only
one line needs to be changed in a multi-line program only one
line of code needs to be written (and one line of control
information). The other advantage is that systems programmers
can understand what the Assembler code does and can select
which change should be applied.

About a sixth of VM/XA was developed using BSL (Basic
Systems Language), IBM's proprietary high-level systems
language which is now called PL/X. Modules produced in this
way were shipped. When users want to apply service to these it
is done by text replacement. This is not particularly convenient
because a one line change requires the whole file to be shipped.
If the change is in a macro or copy file, then all affected
modules must be shipped. Systems programmers cannot choose
which update to apply to a module in circumstances where
there may be more than one update. They must apply all of
them, and must ensure that these 'extra' changes do not
negatively impact their system.

To simplify life for systems programmers, IBM Europe
produces a Service Update Package (SUP) for VM/XA SP.
These SUPs contain pre-installed, pre-tested service at a
specific level.

To make the application of service simpler, IBM gave us SES
(Serviceability Enhancement Support or Staged). VMSES was
typically slow and difficult to use, and sometimes produced
unexpected results.

Realizing the problems with SES, IBM introduced VMSES/E
(ie Extended). VMSES/E is designed to hide the complexity of
source-based service, and supports service by text replacement
for OCO modules. It also contains other enhancements, and by
the end of 1992 is meant to support the maintenance of object
and macro libraries.

To overcome the problem of people not installing PUT tapes,
RSU (Recommended Service Upgrade) tapes are now sent out
for VM/ESA 1.1. RSUs are available monthly and contain a
new set of fixes. Refreshes are available quarterly and contain
all fixes previously available on RSUs. If an RSU is not
applied one month, it is safe to apply the following month's
instead. There is no need for buckets associated with RSUs.
RSUs are tested to avoid conflicts in the code.

Installing both an RSU and a refresh is called a Product Service
Upgrade (PSU). RSUs are meant to reduce the time between a
problem being fixed and the solution being generally available.

An optional tape is available with each refresh called a
Corrective Service Repository (CSR). This contains all closed
fixes available when the refresh is created even though some
may have problems. Fixes that have problems can be useful in
certain circumstances at a site.

With PUTs, PTFs, PEs, SLUs, buckets, OCO, SUP, SES,
VMSES/E, RSUs, PSUs, and CSRs, it's no wonder people are
confused.

J Phillips
Consultant (UK)

