The VVDS dissected

VSAM at MVS sites has developed from a user catalog and
dataspace system into one that uses ICF (Integrated Catalog
Facility) catalogs.  An ICF catalog is divided into two parts:
there is the BCS (Basic Catalog Structure) that contains data
about VSAM and non-VSAM datasets; and the VVDS (VSAM
Volume DataSet) which contains information about VSAM
datasets that reside on the same pack as the VVDS.  The
VVDS (an ESDS) is made up of variable length records that
describe each VSAM entity on the disk.  The information
included in a record includes dataset attributes, high allocated
RBA (Relative Byte Address), high used RBA, and AMDSB
(Access Method Data Statistics Block).

DFP (Data Facility Product) Version 3 introduced System
Managed Storage (SMS).  With this, class information (ie data
class, management class, storage class, and storage group) for
each SMS VSAM and non-VSAM dataset is duplicated in the
BCS and the VVDS

Only one VVDS, conventionally named SYS1.VVDS.volser,
can exist on a disk.  The volser part of its name must match the
VOLSER in the UCB (Unit Control Block) of the device it is
on.  A VVDS can be defined explicitly using DEFINE
CLUSTER, or implicitly when the first dataset is defined on a
volume.  The CI size is always 4K, the default space allocation
is now TRK (10,10).  The VVDS is a frequently accessed
dataset and should be placed near the VTOC, and, like the
VTOC, getting its size right can be very important.  With SMS
additional records describing non-VSAM datasets are placed in
the VVDS.  This can cause the VVDS to go into secondary
extents and cause performance to deteriorate dramatically.  The
size of the VVDS must be large enough right from the start,
and this will usually mean allocating space in cylinders rather
than tracks.

The VVDS is a very special ESDS in that records can be
added, expanded, or removed anywhere that space exists in a
control interval.  This action is controlled by the VVDS
Manager (IGG0CLE0/IGG0CLHV).  When a record is to be
added to a VVDS, it locates a CI that has enough space to
contain the record.  The CI is read into storage and the new
record is placed after the last existing record in the CI.  The CI
control information is updated, and an RDF (Record Definition
Field) describing the length of the new record is added.  The
CIDF (Control Interval Definition Field) is updated.  The CIDF
contains information about available Free Space and the offset
to the beginning of the Free Space.  When a record is removed
from a VVDS, all the records in the CI that come after it are
moved forward so that Free Space exists only after the records,
not in between them.  The RDF for a deleted record is removed
and the CIDF is updated appropriately.  If a record is to be
expanded, the system will check first to ensure that there is
enough Free Space in the CI to contain this extra information.
If enough space exists, the records following the one to be
expanded are moved down the CI, and the record is expanded.
The RDF and CIDF are updated appropriately.  If not enough
Free Space exists in the CI, another CI is found that contains
enough space for the expanded record.  The whole record is
moved to the new CI.  The space in the original CI is then
reclaimed.  All RDFs and CIDFs are updated appropriately.

A VVDS contains five types of record.  They are: VVCR
(VSAM Volume Control Record), VVR (VSAM Volume
Record), NVR (Non-VSAM Volume Record), VVCN (VVCR
Catalog Name extension record), and VVCM (VVCR space
Map extension record).  Each VVDS contains one VVCR (the
first record in the VVDS) and at least one VVR.  NVR records
will only exist on SMS volumes.  VVCN and VVCM exist on
DFP Version 3 systems.

The VVCR is located at RBA 0 and occupies an entire CI.  It
contains the names of up to 36 BCSs that have VSAM datasets,
stored on the same pack as the VVDS, catalogued in them.
Each catalog name slot is formatted such that from position 0
for 44 characters is the catalog name; from position 44 for 4
characters is the RBA of the BCS data component; from 48 for
4 characters is the RBA of the BCS index component; and from
position 52 for four characters is the RBA of the BCS sequence
set.  The VVCR also contains a map detailing each CI in the
VVDS.  Two-byte entries describe the available Free Space in
each CI.  These entries help speed up the process of locating a
CI with enough Free Space for a new record to be inserted.
The VVCR knows how many CIs are in the VVDS

VVRs and NVRs are made up of cells and subcells and can
occur anywhere in the VVDS after RBA 8192.  A VSAM
dataset has a primary VVR in the VVDS on the pack
containing the dataset's primary extent.  Secondary VVRs are
used to describe secondary extents that exist on other disks,
and exist on other packs.  Extent information occurs in cell
X'23' and in the VTOC.

BCS catalog entries for VSAM datasets and SMS non-VSAM
datasets contain RBA pointers to the VVR and NVR
respectively.  This greatly enhances performance.

The VVCN record raises the number of catalogs that the VVDS
can reference by 72.  Although this increases flexibility, it can
make recovery a nightmare.

The VVCM record removes the VVDS size restriction by
allowing more 2-byte space map entries.


J Phillips
Consultant (UK)

