Hi Sam,

I have a new CBT tape contribution to make...

Some time ago (maybe a year or so) someone on IBM-MAIN asked
about how to publish mainframe performance graphs on their
intranet.  I suggested somehow creating a Scalable Vector
Graphics (SVG) file and serving it out directly from your
mainframe web server - that way an intranet web server could have
a page that just linked to the mainframe web server's SVG file.
The 'somehow' was the bit I didn't have available at the time...

Well, I've finally put something together that may be of use to
other people (and not just mainframers either because you can run
it on a PC or even Linux).

Basically the idea is to pull your performance data from wherever
(SMF say), using whatever (Rexx, Assembler, it doesn't matter)
and create an XML file (which is just text) containing the line
chart data.  Then you run my contribution (an XSL stylesheet) to
transform the XML file into an SVG file which describes the line
chart in terms of lines, colors and text.  The SVG file can be
served out directly by your mainframe web server so that all the
user needs is a browser to view the graphics.  SVG is good for
this because complicated graphs don't take up much space - so
transmission to the end-user is quick - and the actual rendering
of the graphic is done on the user's PC.  Also, the images are
scalable (at the PC), so no image quality is lost.  Modern
software like Microsoft Visio understands the SVG format.

Alternatively, the SVG file can be converted to an image file
(PNG, JPEG or TIFF) and published in the usual way.  The user may
have to put up with longer download times and poor print quality
though.

I have included in the xmit file all the Java JAR files necessary
to do the processing, but as a result the xmit file is quite
large (8.5 MB) and does not compress well (7.5 MB zipped).

Oh...and the xmit file is of a RECFM=VB PDS, so the xmitmanager
won't be able to be used to extract the files (I've tried but I
get garbage).  The only way is to upload the xmit file and let
TSO RECEIVE extract the files.

Cheers,
Andrew Armstrong.
