Introduction

A very short introduction

Download from the XMIT dataset the #DOCMP4 member and open as an MP4 video.

A longer introduction

For experienced and inexperienced host users, there is a demand to access
different parts of the z/OS system via an interface:
- Easy to use, like a WEB browser.
- Can add additional information, not or hardly available in z/OS.
- Can define simple operations (archive or compare etc. etc.)
difficult to make on z/OS.
I have tried to make a simple ôin house¦ host explorer
via the IBM z/OS HTTP Server and HTML sites.
The IBM HTTP Server (5.3) is part of the z/OS installation
and contains a number of useful features
(RACF authentication,REXX CGI support etc.).
A collection of REXX CGI programs realize the different functions.
I selected REXX as
- Available everywhere
- Contains a number of string manipulation functions
- Easy to DEBUG or TRACE
The REXX CGI programs are calling the z/OS interface components.
Some part is free available (as the SDSF REXX interface),
 some parts are installed from the CBT tape
 (as the MXI interface) and some parts are free to download from the IBM
(as the SQL REXX interface or the MQ REXX interface)
or from other source (WLM interface from YCOS software).
If there was no any interface,
I wrote simple C/C++ programs to access these parts of the system:
- Catalog information
- Log streamÆs
- ISPF table etc.
The results are presented as dynamic HTML pages, with the Java scripts,
available in the internet open source communities.
IÆm using some browser plug-ins
(Adobe Acrobat for PDF, ISIS AFP viewer for AFP or Notepad++)
and links to the IBM ôLookAt¦ or to the IBM Library Server.
I think the application is extendable in all directions.
It is connecting to, some part of the IBM software (RMF Data Portal),
excellent to access from the WEB, but avoids example the CICS;
as the IBM has the super CICS Explorer.

Warning
This is not a replacement for TSO or SDSF ISPF or any other IBM or
non IBM product.We are using this in the ISIS Papyrus Software
for a while,with a small number of users.
It has never been intensively tested for
performance or security.

Miklos Szigetvari
Januar 2013
<miklos.szigetvari§isis-papyrus.co

