Subject:    CBT Tape submission
From:       <alferguson@northwesternmutual.com>
Date:       Mon, 21 Jul 2008 08:30:56 -0500
To:         <sknutson@cbttape.org>, <sbgolob@cbttape.org>

Sam & Sam,

I have been working on a batch JOB to automate the sending of
our Monthly SCRT Report (Sub-Capacity Reporting Tool) to IBM
for Sub-Capacity Licensing via eMail. It uses:

          o CBT GDG Copy Utility (File 482)
          o A REXX I wrote to Build the IFASMFDP PARMs to get
            just last months MULC Records (runs under IRXJCL).
          o IBM's SCRTTOOL (see
            http://www-03.ibm.com/servers/eserver/zseries/swprice/scrt/
          o A RXSOCKET API based REXX I wrote to submit the
            report as a MIME attachment to IBM's LMS eMail process
            (runs under IRXJCL).
          o A REXX to do date manipulation, based of a REXX &
            Algorithms by David A. Cromley (A System Programmer
            Journal article from early 1990's).

I also have the following JCL for this process:

          o The entire JOB (6 STEPs + 1 per Image with MULC
            Records you need to process)
          o Sample PARMs for my REXX EXECs.
          o Sample PARMs for SCRT Tool (though each shop update
            these to reflect their environment)
          o Sample JOB to LINKEDIT the SCRTTOOL (IBM gives you an
            inline LinkEdit-Go JOB)

We schedule this JOB to run on the 2nd day of the month, early in
the morning (This is the earliest IBM is ready to accept these
reports). It automatically sends the SCRT Tool Report to IBM each
month. IBM's suggest way to accomplish this requires a number of
manual steps (create the report, download to your PC, create an
email, attach the report, and send). Using our process I do not
forget and can go on vacation during the beginning of the month
(with IBM's manual process, this could cause fines if we miss
getting the report to them on time).

Since IBM "improved" its eMail process, it has gotten very picky.
It took 3 months to get this working again (IBM has a number of
not so well documented requirements for this process. They also
gave little information to help us figure out why it was not being
accepted by the new process). This version works with the new
system which assumes your IBM Account Name is also your email
address and is 32 or less characters in total. For those using
Sub-Capacity Licensing, this may be quite useful (and allow them
to keep some more of their hair, vs. trying to figure this out on
their own).

In the process of creating this I wrote a generic RXSOCKET API
base REXX to do eMail with MIME attachments. I also used this to
test the SMTP Server and adjust its configuration (getting it to
work, securing it, and tuning logging). This REXX runs under
IRXJCL and handles the following MIME Types:

The last Content-Type requires access to the Leland Lucius's
ENCODE64 REXX Function from http://www.homerow.net/asm/index.htm
(I believe it is also part of his XMITIP). I also have a sample
JOB to run this REXX adding a couple of attachments. This was an
interesting programming exercise in socket Programming, SMTP
socket programming, and SMTP header coding. I have not seen a
RXSOCKET API REXX that covered all of this, so it may be of
interest to others for this reason. This REXX works under:

          o IRXJCL with pre-allocated files (TSO is not required)
          o TSO with pre-allocated files
          o A REXX or CList running under TSO, used to build and
            pre-allocate the files.

Attached is a TSO XMIT file of the PDS with the above files. If
you see anything missing I should include, let me know (I probably
need better documentation on the attachment types and the EMCNTL
DD's Control cards. When I get some more time I will try to put
this together). Thanks.

---------------

Al Ferguson        | mailto:AlFerguson@northwesternmutual.com
Technical Support  |  phone: 414-661-5403
Northwestern Mutual|    fax: 414-661-6957
1E220

