
Macro: DOTIMES

Syntax:   (DOTIMES arg1 &rest args)

 The first argument (a list of a local variable with an initialization
 and optional increment specifications) is required.

 At least one subsequent argument is required, but any number of
 arguments greater than two may be specified.

 arg1 (partially evaluated) - a local variable clause, i.e.  a list of 2
 or 3 elements, where the first element (not evaluated) is a symbol, the
 second (evaluated) is a fixnum which the variable is compared to, and
 the third (evaluated) is the value to be returned (this is optional and
 defaults to NIL).

 argn (conditionally evaluated) - any LISP object.

Returns:

 The third element of the list arg1, or NIL, after executing the
 body (args) with the first element of arg1 bound to successive
 increments of the second element of arg2.

Processing:

 The general format of DOTIMES is:

   (DOTIMES (var count &optional result) . body)

 DOTIMES iterates over a sequence of integers.  First "count" is
 evaluated, which should produce an integer.  Then the forms in "body"
 are evaluated; the entire body is executed once for each integer from
 zero (inclusive) to the value of "count" (exclusive), in order, with
 the variable "var" bound to the integer.  (Note that if the value of
 "count" is zero or less, the body is not executed at all.)  At the
 end of this, "var" is bound to the number of times the body was
 executed, which should be the value of "count" if it was truly
 an integer.  Then "result" (a single form, NOT an implicit PROGN) is
 evaluated, and the result is the value returned from DOTIMES.

 If "result" is omitted, DOTIMES returns NIL after executing the body.

 A RETURN may be used within the body to terminate the loop and return
 a specified value.

Errors signaled:

 Invalid syntax (missing or invalid arguments).
 Invalid variable name (not a symbol).

Notes:

 The count argument is assumed to evaluate to a integer, or at least
 a number.  If it does not, a run-time error will occur.

Examples:

 (LET ((FOO NIL))
      (DOTIMES (X 10 FOO) (PUSH X FOO)))

          ==> (9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0)

