
Function: MSGLEVEL

Syntax:   (MSGLEVEL &optional arg1)

 arg1 (optional, evaluated) - a fixnum between 0 and 3, or NIL.

Returns:

 A fixnum representing the current message level; if a non-NIL value
 is specified, that value becomes the current message level and is
 returned.

Processing:

 If the argument is NIL or omitted, the current message level is
 returned as a fixnum.

 If the argument is not NIL, it represents a value to be assigned to
 the message level.  The current message level is updated to this
 value and the argument value is returned as the value.

 The message level works like this:  Whenever a low-level ZIL function
 displays a ZIL message, it checks the current message level against the
 severity level of the message.  Messages whose severity level is less
 than the current message level are not displayed.

 The message/severity levels are as follows:

 0 - informational; displayed for information only, no error condition.

 1 - warning; something unusual but not serious.

 2 - error; accompanied by signalling of an error (THROW to tag NIL).

 3 - severe; an unusual condition that the user must know about.

 The initial message level is 1 (all but trivial informational messages
 displayed), except under Macsyma, where it is 2.

 Messages issued via the WARN function are suppressed when the
 message level is greater than 1.

 Messages issued via the ERROR function are suppressed when the
 message level is greater than 2.

Errors signaled:

 Invalid argument (not a fixnum, or out of range - must be 0,1,2, or 3).

Notes:

 Messages that result in unconditional termination of the ZIL
 environment, such as sever garbage collection errors, are not subject
 to suppression; they will always appear, regardless of the setting of
 MSGLEVEL.

 Garbage collection messages are not subject to MSGLEVEL.  See GCMSG.

 MSGLEVEL is used to control the display of message issued by ZIL
 assembler-level modules via TPUT.

 See member $CODES for the severity levels associated with these
 messages.

 Setting the message level higher than 2 is not recommended.

Examples:

 (MSGLEVEL)
 (MSGLEVEL NIL) ...are equivalent and return the current message level.

 (MSGLEVEL 0)      permits all messages to be displayed.
 (MSGLEVEL 1)      suppresses informational messages.
 (MSGLEVEL 2)      suppresses informational and warning messages;
                   only errors will be reported.
 (MSGLEVEL 3)      suppresses all messages except those that report
                   unusual system errors or fatal errors, or
                   garbage collection messages; this is not
                   recommended, as it will result in errors being
                   signalled with no message being displayed.

