
Function: PRINC

Syntax:   (PRINC arg1 file2)

 arg1  (required, evaluated) - any LISP object.
 file2 (optional, evaluated) - an output file name.

Returns:

 arg1, after it has been printed on file2.

Processing:

 arg1 is printed at the current character position on the current line
 of output file file2 (the TERPRI and ZPUTFPO functions can change
 these).

 The current character position is updated to point to the position
 immediately following the last character written.

 The printed representation of the object, where possible, will be
 in "human-readable form".

 (1) Symbols and strings are not printed with delimiters; the text of
     their names is printed as is.

 (2) The accuracy of flonum values is not the greatest.

 (3) Objects which cannot be typed in directly (e.g. compiled code
     objects, structures, unrecognizable entities) will print
     using the #< ... > syntax.  This is defined as not being able
     to be read back in.

 If the printed representation of an atom, or a dot or parenthesis,
 would extend past the end of the current line, and that printed
 representation is shorter than the line length, the TERPRI function
 is invoked to write out the current line and start a new line.

 The null list () is printed as NIL.

 The QUOTE function is always printed in full, never as a quote mark.

 Lists are printed in dotted-pair notation if they contain a CONS
 whose CDR is a non-NIL atom; otherwise they are printed in standard
 list format.

 A string or symbol print name longer than the output line length will
 be split between the next line (after a TERPRI) and the line following.

Errors signaled:

 Invalid output file object (not a symbol 4 characters or less).
 Specified output file is not allocated or could not be opened.

Notes:

 See member $FILE for more information on file names.

 See member $PRINTER for more information on printing functions.

 Compare PRIN1, which is almost the same but prints objects in formats
 that can be read back in.

Examples:

 (PRINC 'A)
 (PRINC 'A NIL)  are equivalent and return A after printing...

                 A

                 on the standard output file.

 Note that the interpreter will print A (the returned value)
 on the standard output file as well.

 (PROGN
  (PRINC 'A               'FOO)
  (PRINC NIL              'FOO)
  (PRINC (CONS 'B 'C)     'FOO)
  (PRINC (LIST '|b| '|c|) 'FOO)
  (PRINC "Hi there."      'FOO)
 )
                 returns "Hi there." after printing...

                 ANIL(B . C)(b c)Hi there.

                 on output file FOO.

