
Function: RDRMACRO

Syntax:   (RDRMACRO arg1 arg2)

 arg1 (required, evaluated) - a one-character symbol or string, or
                              a character fixnum.
 arg2 (required, evaluated) - a compiled code SUBR object, or NIL.

Returns:

 NIL, after assigning the compiled code SUBR specified by arg2 to the
 character specified by arg1 as a reader macro.

Processing:

 If arg2 is NIL, the reader macro definition for the character specified
 by arg1 is removed from the read table.

 Otherwise, the read table and reader macro chain are updated with a
 definition of the character specified by arg1 as a reader macro; when
 the READ function encounters it, it will execute the compiled code
 object specified as arg2 to RDRMACRO.

 The compiled code SUBR must be a function that takes one argument;
 this argument is bound to the file name currently in use by READ
 when it invokes the reader macro.  This enables the reader macro
 code to access data from the file being read, via functions like
 READ, READCH and PEEKCH.

 The code is executed under the environment active at the time that
 READ invokes it; closures are not permitted.

 If the code needs to access the reader macro character as an atom,
 the RMCHAR function will do this.

 If the function wishes to return "nothing" to the reader (i.e. have
 the reader continue reading with the next S-expression),
 it may return zero values (e.g. via the form (VALUES)), or
 the RMNIL function will do this.

 This is a low-level function, generally for internal use.
 To specify interpretive code or other types of objects as reader
 macros, use the DEFRDMAC function.

 The following are equivalent:

  (RDRMACRO '|?|  (ZILLOAD 'MYFUNK))
  (RDRMACRO  "?"  (ZILLOAD 'MYFUNK))
  (RDRMACRO  #\?  (ZILLOAD 'MYFUNK))

Errors signaled:

 Invalid first or second argument.

Notes:

 See documentation on READ, DEFRDMAC and RMCHAR for more information
 on reader macro processing.

 A SUBR compiled code object is a value that is returned only by the
 ZILLOAD function.  Closures, whether compiled or interpreted, are not
 permitted by RDRMACRO; use DEFRDMAC to define reader macros using
 arbitrary forms that can be APPLY'ed.

 Currently, when a reader macro definition is deleted, the syntax for
 the reader macro character is restored to whatever it was before it was
 made into a reader macro.

 Reader macro definitions for the following characters are predefined:

 ' (single quote)
 ` (backquote)
 , (comma)
 # (sharp sign)

 See member $RMACRO in this documentation for details on these.

Examples:

 Assume a reader macro defined thus:

   (RDRMACRO '|?| (ZILLOAD 'QFOO))

 where QFOO is a SUBR derived from compiling the function:

   (DEFUN QFOO (X) (LIST (RMCHAR) (READ X)))

 Then, when the following is read in:

   ?FOO

 the following will be returned by READ:

   (? FOO)

 (Note that under the interpreter, this will be evaluated by EVAL
 before the user sees the result.)

