
Function: ZERROR

Syntax:   (ZERROR &optional arg1 arg2 &rest args)

 arg1 (optional, evaluated) - any LISP object, but generally a string.
 arg2 (optional, evaluated) - any LISP object.
 args (optional, evaluated) - any LISP object.

Returns:

 Nothing; after arg1 (and the other arguments, if non-NIL) is printed to
 the standard output file, a THROW to tag NIL is issued.

Processing:

 The first argument is assumed to be a message, and is therefore
 written to the standard output file via PRINC.  If the first
 argument is omitted, nothing gets printed.

 If the second argument is not NIL, it is assumed to be a random LISP
 value, and is therefore written to the standard output file via PRIN1,
 with a dash separating the two values.

 If the rest of the args are present, they are assumed to be more
 random LISP values, and are therefore written to the standard output
 file in succession via PRIN1.

 A TERPRI is then issued to the standard output file, and a THROW to
 tag NIL is issued with a return value of NIL to be passed back to the
 most recent CATCH for tag NIL, if one exists.

 Generally, the first argument is an error message, and the second
 argument is the object in question that was in error.

 If the current message level is greater than 2, no writing to the
 standard output file takes place, but the THROW still occurs.

Errors signaled:

 None (other than the error being requested!).

Notes:

 If no CATCH is active for a tag of NIL, this is considered to be a
 fatal error and the ZIL program is abended with a user code.  If the
 error message (in this case, the first argument) begins with the
 characters ZILnnnn, where nnnn is a 4-digit number between 0001 and
 4095, that number is used as the user abend code; otherwise a user
 abend code of zero is issued.

Examples:

 (SETQ A 'VALUE-OF-A)
 (ZERROR "Invalid argument" A)  will print:

  Error: Invalid argument - VALUE-OF-A

 on the standard output file and issue a THROW to tag NIL.

 (CATCH NIL (ZERROR "Error message"))  ==> NIL ; after printing

  Error: Error message

 on the standard output file.

