
Function: ZEVAUTO

Syntax:   (ZEVAUTO sym1 &optional errp)

 sym1 (required, evaluated) - a symbol.
 errp (required, evaluated) - T or NIL.

Returns:

 NIL if no function definition could be found for sym1, otherwise
 a non-NIL value.

Processing:

 This function resolves a symbol sym1 being used as a function name
 when it currently has no function property.  Resolution is based
 on the value of the AUTOLOAD property, as follows:

   If the AUTOLOAD property is a string, then it is the name of a
   data set (file) to be loaded.

   If the AUTOLOAD property is a non-null list, then it is a form
   to be evaluated.

 In both of the above cases, it is presumed that the file or form,
 when loaded or evaluated, will cause sym1 to become defined as a
 function.

   If the AUTOLOAD property is a symbol, then an attempt is made to
   load the compiled function definition from the system ZIL library.
   The name under which the function is searched for is the value of
   sym1's AUTOLOAD property if non-NIL, or sym1 itself if the value of
   sym1's AUTOLOAD property is NIL.

 To prevent infinite looping in the evaluator, ZEVAUTO removes the
 AUTOLOAD property from sym1 if it is a string or a list.  If it is a
 symbol, the AUTOLOAD property is retained; however, if the attempt to
 load the compiled function fails, then if errp is NIL, ZEVAUTO
 returns NIL, otherwise an "undefined function" error is signalled.

 The removal of the AUTOLOAD property is skipped if an error occurs
 processing the AUTOLOAD property.

 NOTE: If a form is the value of the AUTOLOAD property, it is
       evaluated in a null evaluation environment.  In other words,
       it is evaluated as if it had occurred at top level.  In
       particular, no dynamic SPECIAL variable bindings are visible
       (only global ones).

 Note that the autoload property is removed during autoloading
 (except when the autoload property is a symbol) and restored
 afterwards (in case, say, an attention interrupt occurred during
 the loading of a file).  If the autoload process went to completion
 the autoload property is removed anyhow.

Errors signaled:

 Undefined function (if errp is NIL).
 Invalid AUTOLOAD property.

Notes:

 The technique for preventing multiple autoload attempts has one minor
 drawback:

 Putting a property on a symbol's property list can have the effect of
 making the LISP system think that the symbol is not "worthless".  This
 means that functions like APROPOS and GCTWA, depending on their
 implementation, may undesirably treat these symbols as meaningful, when
 in fact the ZIL-NO-AUTOLOAD property only reinforces the worthlessness
 of the symbol (if it doesn't have any other features, that is).

