
Function: ZEVSYM

Syntax:   (ZEVSYM var1)

 var1 (required, evaluated) - a symbol.

Returns:

 The current dynamic (SPECIAL) BINDING (not the value) of the variable
 specified by var1, or NIL if the variable is unbound or bound to
 the "unbound marker".

Processing:

 arg1 must be a symbol other than T, NIL or a keyword.

 The current global or dynamic "SPECIAL" binding for the symbol is
 located and is returned, unless there is no binding or the
 value component of the binding is the "unbound marker", in
 which case NIL is returned.
 (Symbol autoloading may be invoked if there is an AUTOVALUE
 property on the symbol and it does not currently have a
 dynamically bound value.)

 The value of the variable is the CDR of the binding.

Errors signaled:

 None.

Notes:

 ZEVSYM is the internal ZIL function that accesses SPECIAL variable
 bindings.  It underlies SYMEVAL as well as interpreted and compiled
 accesses of SPECIAL variable values.

 No error checking is done.  ZEVSYM assumes that you have passed it
 a valid, non-self-evaluating, dynamically bound symbol.

 Symbol-autoloading works on the value of the AUTOVALUE property, as
 follows:

   If the AUTOVALUE property is a string, then it is the name of a
   data set (file) to be loaded.

   If the AUTOVALUE property is a non-null list, then it is a form
   to be evaluated.

 In both of the above cases, it is presumed that the file or form,
 when loaded or evaluated, will cause the variable name in question
 to become defined.

 To prevent infinite looping in the evaluator, this function removes
 the AUTOVALUE property from the variable name if it is a string or
 a list.

 The removal of the AUTOVALUE property is skipped if an error occurs
 processing the AUTOVALUE property.

 NOTE: If a form is the value of the AUTOLOAD property, it is
       evaluated in a null evaluation environment.  In other words,
       it is evaluated as if it had occurred at top level.  In
       particular, no dynamic SPECIAL variable bindings are visible
       (only global ones).

