
Function: ZILEDIT

Syntax:   (ZILEDIT arg1)

 arg1 (required, evaluated) - a data set name (string or symbol).

Returns:

 T or NIL, depending on whether the data set specified by arg1 was
 saved after the ISPF editor has been invoked on it.

Processing:

 The ISPF editor is entered on the data set whose name is specified
 by arg1.  If the data was saved, T is returned; otherwise NIL is
 returned.

 If a PDS without a member name is specified, an ISPF member list
 will be displayed; in other words, this function is just like the
 ISPF EDIT service, and is in fact a direct interface thereto.

 No attempt is made to load the contents of the data set into the
 ZIL environment.

 This function is valid only if ZIL was entered under ISPF.

 Furthermore, if ZILEDIT is invoked from within a LISP program
 (including the interpreter) that was invoked under ISPF via the Draper
 XINVOKE command, or via a command or program that uses the
 TSO/Extensions Authorized Service Facility, it will fail due to ISPF
 dialog services not being available.

Errors signaled:

 Arg1 not a symbol or a string, or a null string, or a string
 longer than 56 characters.

 ISPF dialog services not available; either ZIL is running outside
 of ISPF or it is running under the TSO Authorized Service Facility
 or other environment where ISPF dialog services are temporarily
 unavailable.

 Errors detected by ISPF dialog services (data set not available, etc.).

Notes:

 ISPF and ISPF/PDF Version 2 must be installed to use this function.

 This function underlies ED.

 ZILEDIT may be used to edit any type of dataset, not just ZIL datasets.
 Use ED to edit function definitions.

 If you were in split screen mode when you started ZIL, you will
 be put back into the same split screen mode when ZILEDIT enters ISPF.

 The data set is opened for output.  See HELP for OPEN for more
 information on valid data set names.

Examples:

 (ZILEDIT "cmd.clist(zlogon)")

 allows you to edit your ZLOGON CLIST while under ZIL.

