
Function: ZPUTFPO

Syntax:   (ZPUTFPO arg1 &optional arg2)

 arg1 (required, evaluated) - a fixnum.
 arg2 (optional, evaluated) - an output file name.

Returns:

 arg1, which updates the current character pointer of the output file
 specified by arg2.

Processing:

 The fixnum value of arg1 replaces the current character position in the
 file block for the file specified by arg2, and is itself returned.

 The value is a 1-based column value, and should be between 1 and the
 logical line length of the output file, with the following exception:

 If the file is the standard output file (NIL), an argument of 0 will
 cause the current character pointer to point to the print control
 character; this technique may be used to set the print control
 character (ASA control characters are used).

 If 0 is specified on a file other than NIL, results are unpredictable.
 If a value greater than the line length is specified, a new line
 condition is forced, but other results are unpredictable.

 The effect of changing the current output file pointer is:

 (1) to cause data on the current line to be overlaid if the value is
     decreased, or
 (2) to leave blanks in the current line between the previously
     written data and the new location if the value is increased.

 arg1, if omitted, defaults to NIL, which represents
 the standard output file.

 The value of the current character pointer for an output file is
 altered implicitly by output functions like PRINC, PRIN1, and TERPRI.

Errors signaled:

 Invalid output file object (not a symbol 4 characters or less).
 Specified output file is not allocated or could not be opened.
 First argument not a fixnum.
 First argument negative (less than 0).

Notes:

 See member $FILE for more information on file names.

 Use of an out-of-range value as the first argument may cause
 serious errors in the ZIL environment.  Do so with extreme caution.

Examples:

 (ZPUTFPO 1) and (ZPUTFPO 1 NIL) are equivalent, and permit the current
             line of standard output to be overlaid with new data.

 (ZPUTFPO 10 'FOO)  sets the current column of output file FOO to 10.

 (ZPUTFPO (+ (ZGETFPO 'BAR) N) 'BAR)   causes the current column
             position of output file BAR to be "tabbed" over N spaces.

