               INTRODUCTION TO THE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIAL

      This file consists of articles submitted by Sam Golob of
Newsweek Incorporated to "Technical Support" magazine of NaSPA, the
National Systems Programmers Association, headquartered in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  The material pertains largely to programs on
the CBT tape, and to topics of general systems programmer interest.
With the kind permission of Bob Becker, the editor of "Technical
Support", they are being distributed with the CBT tape to further
the usefulness of other files on the tape, and the tape in general.
It is the avowed purpose of NaSPA to increase the knowledgeability
of the system programmer community, and the distribution of this
material to the public is consistent with this purpose.

      The address of NaSPA is:

             National Systems Programmers Association
             7044 S. 13th Street
             Oak Creek, Wisconsin 53154
             ( 414 ) 768-8000

      My address is:

             Sam Golob
             P.O. Box 906
             Tallman, NY 10982-0906

        email:  sbgolob@attglobal.net   and/or  sbgolob@aol.com

      A TABLE OF CONTENTS follows:

$$$INTRO  -  You are reading it.

CBTCNR1   -  A column on useful programs on the CBT tape.  Originally
               meant to be monthly.  This is installment 1.

CBTCNR2   -  A column on useful programs on the CBT tape.  Originally
               meant to be monthly.  This is installment 2.

CBTINTRO  -  An introduction to the CBT tape in general.  The article
               shows how the CBT tape can improve your installation
               greatly by providing powerful tools.  This is meant as
               an introduction only, and suggests a few of the tools
               which the author has found useful in his work.

IOCOUNT   -  Description of the amazing IO-count zap to the operating
               system, which provides EXCP-count information in JCL
               listings, for all allocated DDNAMES.  The modification
               is found on File 369 of the CBT tape.  This is a
               detailed description of how to install it.

JESART    -  This is a description of how to convert from JES2 version
               1.3.4 to the higher releases of JES2.

SMPART    -  I believe this material is found nowhere else in this form.
               This article is meant to introduce new and old systems
               programmers to the CONCEPTS OF SMP.  It can be used as a
               "how-to-do-it" introduction to any level of SMP.  It is
               clear, conceptual, and completely step-by-step.  It
               covers concepts of all releases of SMP, both SMP4
               and SMP/E.  The article was tested by being given to
               non-systems-programmers to read, and is meant for anyone
               who has anything to do with MVS system maintenance.
               This means non-technical managers as well as technical
               people.


       A series of three articles has been written as a course to
teach the subcommands of the fantastic "PDS" program that can be found
on file 182 of the CBT tape (with utilities on file 296).  These
articles are now distributed with the PDS package on file 182, and
will not be repeated here.

       My thanks also go to Arnie Casinghino for his cooperation and
his unflagging dedication to the system programmer community.



