                  FREE SOFTWARE CORNER - Installment 1


       This is a new column which is designed to benefit the readership
of "Technical Support" by discussion of individual valuable tools from
the CBT Tape and other Public Domain tapes.  Large packages such as
PDS merit full feature articles, but many smaller and valuable "single
utilities" might go unnoticed and unused by a public which needs them,
without a forum such as this.

       The original idea for this column came to me from Steve Smith,
one of the authors of PDS, who was trying to go through the CBT tape
to find things he could use.  A clearinghouse for discussion of the
popularly used public offerings would help him a lot, he told me,
and I brought up the subject with Scott Sherer and Bob Becker, who
graciously offered the space in the magazine.  So here we are!

       This month, I'd like to talk about several nice things to have.
Because space is short and our readers are clever, we won't tell you
how to install these tools.  You can read the instructions and do it
yourself.  We'll point you to them and say a few things about them,
and let you do the rest.

       Item number one is called JCLSCAN.  It can be found on File 32
of a NEW CBT tape (version 275 or later) or on File 313 of an older
tape (version 260 or older).  It is a TSO command processor that you
point to a dataset of JCL to check it for converter errors.  It gives
the same result as TYPRUN=SCAN, except that:  A. Only the errors are
displayed.  B. The results are nicely formatted and go to the TSO tube.
C. You don't have to wait for an initiator to test for JCL errors.
D. This program actually calls IBM's converter module (through a user
SVC) so you are guaranteed to get the same results as in running the
actual job.  Neat tool, especially if you are developing new PROCs.

       Next great little gimmick is called CVTCLIST, and it can be found
on File 187 of most of the recent CBT tapes.  It instantly converts
a CLIST pds from the RECFM(FB) LRECL(80) format to RECFM(VB) LRECL(255)
and vice-versa.  The VB to FB direction has a few bugs (which I intend
to fix when I have time someday) but the FB to VB conversion absolutely
runs rings around anything IBM has ever publicly come up with.  It is
almost instantaneous, and it converts an entire pds effortlessly.

       People interested in MVS maintenance may like File 118 of the
CBT tape, which contains a package to "pre-process" a PUT tape before
any version of SMP gets a hand on it.  The main program in this file
is called PUTXREF, which produces a report that lists all sysmods on
a PUT tape, sorted by FMID.  This is followed by a program SMPFMUPV,
which can read this report and produce card-image SMP input of all the
sysmod numbers SEPARATED FMID by FMID.  I have just finished a new
program, called SMPUPD, which should appear on this file shortly, that
takes a sequential PTF file and creates a PDS from it, with the
individual PTFs as members.  This will let you research new PTFs before
you RECEIVE them.  File 428 is related to File 118, but File 428 will
be primarily of interest to people who still have SMP4.  I have used
the tools on File 428 to do an entire PUT with SMP4, without looking
at a single hard copy!  Some of it is definitely adaptable to SMP/E.

       I have to mention the EXCP-count zap to IBM's JCL allocation
messages, which can be found on File 369 of the CBT tape, and which
comes from the Planning Research Corporation in Virginia.  This zap
is easily maintained, although it requires a special technique, and
I intend to discuss it in detail in a future article.  Meanwhile, if
you want the best way to get EXCP counts (in my opinion), look into
this.  There is an XA version and a MVS/370 version on this file.
(I'm not mentioning the other goodies, such as the AUTOIPL program,
which are there.)

       I'll conclude this month's sampling with the SUPRNAME program
from the excellent collection in File 270 from the State of Washington.
This is a cool tool that will eliminate a lot of your vtoc-zapping.
It is a front-end to AMASPZAP that somehow finds the name of a file
on a vtoc, and renames or deletes the file without having to worry
about enqueue.  If you have a scrap copy of SYS1.VTAMLIB lying around
and you can't delete it while VTAM is up, this is definitely for you.
Sample JCL is included to run this program, including the case where
the pack is indexed, and you have to "un-index" it before the delete
and "re-index" it afterward.

       Good luck and good hunting.  If you have suggestions for
programs to mention in this column, you can write to me, Sam Golob,
at sbgolob@attglobal.net .

