
 In 1981 I was a junior MVS sysprog given the task of looking after an
 OSIV/F4 system running on a M150F (rated at 0.4 MIPS) which had 3 MB
 of real storage.  Actually, FACOM specifed 2 MB in the tender, but the
 system required 3 MB to IPL.

 (Although the SECV was a MVS shop, a new system was required to run
 the Loy Yang A power station's Plant Management System.  The system
 would be located in the power station, and was not to be connected
 to the general purpose MVS system at head office.  The application
 was to be written in PL/I since the SECV was a PL/I shop and could
 therefore use existing staff for application development.  IBM's offer of
 a 4331 running DOS/VS did not impress, so the FACOM offer was accepted.)

 F4 was "MVS-like" and so I was interested in finding out how like MVS
 it was.  How many of our "modern conveniences" that we had on our
 large MVS system would work on F4?

 (F4 was eventually renamed to MSP - Multidimensional System Product.)

 Most of our software pertaining to DASD (the F493 units had the same
 geometry as 3350s), tapes, catalogs (yes, I set up a CVOL) and TSO
 (called TSS here) worked without change.  Even QUEUE worked, although
 the senior sysprog had to zap it to fix a TPUT macro expansion bug
 which Fujitsu had faithfully copied from the IBM service stream.

 But many control blocks were not the same.  For example, in fixed low
 core, the ASCB pointers were before the TCB pointers instead of after.
 Many of the TCB fields were the same, but the ASCB fields were rearranged.

 Anyway, I tried lots of programs from the SPLA and CBT tapes on the F4
 system, and some worked if compiled on MVS, some worked of compiled on
 F4, and some worked if I hacked the code.

 To replicate some sort of RMFMON functionality, I took the CHIMP program
 from one of the tapes and played around with it.  Eventually I got it
 to show me a line per address space in fullscreen mode, as it was intended
 to do.  I then found a later version of it which seemed to have provision
 for showing swap domain details, so I wrote a version of that for the
 FACOM system as well.  Options D, C, E, F, etc. followed in due course.

 I liked the program so much that I ported it to MVS.  Eventually I added
 3270 extended data stream highlighting and colour, and so it snowballed.

 There were numerous iterations of porting improvements between MVS and
 MSP in both directions.

 I eventually left the SECV and become a contractor.  I converted my
 version of CHIMP to run under MVS/XA, renamed it to IMP, and began to
 license it.

 (The first time I tried the IMP command, I received
 ENTER SUBFIELD OF KEYWORD 'INDATASET' -
 from the system, so I abbreviated the command name even more to IM.)

 I had MSP and MVS customers, and kept it current for the newest releases
 of MVS/ESA and OS/390 that I had access to.  One of the distributors used
 the name IMON instead of IMP and so that's what it's called today.

 By the time z/OS came about all of the MSP sites in Australia (that I knew
 about) had transitioned off the platform, and most MVS customers had
 outsourced, though I continued to maintain it for my own use.  I allowed
 free use for 7060 (Multiprise 3000) and 1247 (Intel emulation) CPU types,
 and later for 9672 CPUs that could not migrate to z/OS.

 With the advent of Hercules around the turn of the century, I began work
 on retrofitting the OS/390 version to MVS 3.8, and that file is shipped
 separately.

 This file contains the z/OS version which seems to function up to V2R4.
 It lacks much 64-bit and UNIX awareness, but can still provide interesting
 insight into the overall performance of a z/OS system image.

 As I no longer have any paying customers for IMON, I have decided to make
 the source code generally available for such entertainment value as it
 may have.

 Greg Price, July 2020

