
        INTERACTIVE MONITORING PROGRAM - USER'S GUIDE
        =========== ========== =======   ====== =====

  0)    CONTENTS
        --------
        1)    INTRODUCTION
        2)    INSTALLATION
        3)    CUSTOMIZATION
        4)    ORGANIZATION


  1)    INTRODUCTION
        ------------
           The Interactive Monitoring Program (IMP) is a full-screen
        real-time monitor of the MVS Operating System that runs in the
        TSO foreground environment and interacts with the TSO user via
        a 3270-family or compatible terminal.  IMP is designed to
        exploit terminal features and so is best viewed on a terminal
        with extended colour and highlighting capability.  Program
        Access and Program Function Keys are used to simplify input
        requests while intensity, colour and highlighting are used to
        assist the understanding of output.
           One of the functions IMP can perform is to display LSPACER
        data on the TSO screen.  LSPACER is a separate product which
        accumulates DASD free space statitics, enabling the observation
        of disk space utilization cycles over a shift, day, or other
        time period.  A possible use for this is to gauge disk space
        restrictions on application batch windows.

  2)    INSTALLATION
        ------------
           IMP consists of two (2) load modules which can be installed
        in the same library.  The main module is IM which can be
        invoked via the TSO CALL command, but is best installed into an
        "automatic" library so that the user can invoke it via the IM
        TSO command.  The other module is IMPXASPY which performs the
        OS console display function, this being one of the options
        available for selection and presented to the user in the main
        menu.  If the LSPACER product is also supplied then there will
        be two (2) additional load modules called LSPACER and LERASER.
        All load modules will be shipped on tape in IEBCOPY-unloaded
        format, and so IEBCOPY should be used to copy them to disk.
        The COPYMOD statement may be used to reblock the modules to an
        installation-preferred block size, but it is important that
        the link edit attributes supplied be preserved throughout the
        installation process.
           While a good feel for IMP's capabilities may be gained by
        running it unauthorized, an APF authorized environment is
        required for full-function.  It is therefore expected that IMP
        will be installed into an APF authorized library and that IM
        will be registered as an APF authorized TSO command in the
        standard way for the release of TSO or TSO/E installed.  Once
        these steps are performed the IM TSO command should be ready
        for use, although the installer may wish to carry out some
        further customization.  (See CUSTOMIZATION below.)
           The installer should note that it is the installer's
        responsibility to restrict the availability of IMP functions
        to those individuals who are authorized to use them at that
        particular installation.  Typically, this may mean installing
        IMP into a library that only system programmers can access,
        or installing IMP into the link list but denying access to most
        or all options to general users.

  3)    CUSTOMIZATION
        -------------
           Once IMP is installed it may be desirable to restrict access
        to some or all options to a subset of users.  When IMP is
        invoked without any operands or parameters then the main menu
        will be displayed which will list the options which may be
        selected by the user.  Any option listed may be selected,
        although all possible options may not be listed.  For example,
        option "O" (the OS console display) requires an APF authorized
        environment, so whenever IMP is invoked unauthorized option "O"
        will never appear on the main menu.  Similarly, an installation
        can choose to disable selected options for all users or some
        users.
           Every option has a flag byte which is constructed at execute
        time and an authorization byte which is pre-set.  The last
        three bits of the flag byte are for internal use and may change
        during execution.  The first five bits are copied from the
        option's authorization byte.  The installer can alter each
        option's authorization byte using the AMASPZAP service aid or
        an equivalent program.  The last three bits of the
        authorization byte are ignored and should be left zero.
           By specifying the first five bits of the authorization
        bytes, the installer can make an option available to everyone
        who can invoke IMP, a subset of users based on the OPER, ACCT,
        JCL and MOUNT TSO privileges, or can disable the option for the
        whole installation.
           The meanings of the authorization byte's bits are:
        X'80' - OPER is not needed for this option
        X'40' - ACCT is not needed for this option
        X'20' - JCL is not needed for this option
        X'10' - MOUNT is not needed for this option
        X'08' - this option is enabled at this installation
        X'04' - unused and should be left zero
        X'02' - unused and should be left zero
        X'01' - unused and should be left zero
           and some examples are:
        X'F8' - access to this option is unrestricted
        X'78' - OPER is required for this option
        X'38' - OPER and ACCT are required for this option
        X'D8' - JCL is required for this option
        X'F0' - this option is disabled at this installation.
           The offset of an option's authorization byte within the IM
        load module is simply given by the hexadecimal for the EBCDIC
        of the option name.  Therefore, the authorization bytes for
        options "$", "A", "B", "N", "O" and "T" are at offsets +5B,
        +C1, +C2, +D5, +D6 and +E3 respectively.  As shipped, users
        with OPER, ACCT and JCL have full access to all IMP functions.
           The installer may wish to display an option's flag byte
        (including the authorization bits) for verification purposes.
        This can be achieved by entering '..' (two periods) with PF2
        or PF14.  The hexadecimal of the flag byte for the current
        option will then be displayed on the heading line.  This
        command is not documented anywhere else as it is not intended
        for general usage.

  4)    ORGANIZATION
        ------------
           IMP organization is designed to enable rapid selection of
        the desired display with minimal keystrokes from any "location"
        either elsewhere in IMP or from any "place" that supports TSO
        commands.  Accordingly, IMP is an end-point for software
        nesting, meaning that other programs or commands cannot not be
        invoked directly from within IMP.  Whenever IMP functions are
        desired IM can be quickly invoked by the user and then exited
        with a single keystroke to allow the resumption of other work.
           Although IMP may appear at first glance to be organized
        hierarchically, it is in fact a collection of functional
        components called "options" of which only one may be executing
        at any given time.  The main menu display can be considered as
        option "blank" or option "null" and exists chiefly to facilitate
        passing control to other more productive options selected by the
        user from the presented list.  Once an option has been selected
        the user is free to re-display the primary menu and make another
        selection or directly transfer control to another option without
        displaying the menu.  Commands to do this are discussed under
        below.
           Every screen image presented by IMP has an input area in the
        top left-hand corner of the screen.  This is called the PRIMARY
        input area.  This area allows two bytes of input except when
        the main menu is being displayed when up to three bytes may be
        input.  Some screens presented by IMP may have other input
        areas, but display-mode options and global subcommands are
        usually only recognized when input from the primary input area.
           IMP has several different types of screen.  They are:
           - menus
           - detail screens
           - HELP panels
           - GLOSSARY panels
        and are shown in well-defined circumstances.  Currently the
        only menu screen is the main menu, and it is similar to a HELP
        panel in that it is substantially pre-coded but is modifiable
        by IMP at execute-time.
           The "detail screens" are the actual displays for which IMP
        exists.  A given option has one or more display formats with
        its contents being updated either automatically at regular
        time intervals or whenever the user depresses the ENTER key.
           Each option has a HELP panel which lists subcommands that
        are valid for the current option.  Such commands are known as
        LOCAL SUBCOMMANDS.  The user can also validly select a GLOBAL
        SUBCOMMAND but these are only listed in the HELP panel for the
        main menu.  The global subcommand '?' (question mark) is used
        to display the help panel, although the help panel of an option
        is also usually displayed whenever an invalid or unknown command
        is requested.  The HELP panel can be edited at execute-time by
        IMP to indicate current conditions and limitations.
           The global subcommand '!' (exclamation mark) can be issued
        at any time to request glossary information about the current
        option.  This information is presented in the form of pre-coded
        screen images which may be presented sequentially or accessed
        individually by the user.  An option may have one or several
        glossary panels, or none at all.  The glossary panels
        accessable from the main menu contain "general information"
        which pertains to IMP as a whole.  It may be instructive for
        first-time IMP users to read this before attempting to fully
        exploit IMP functionality.
           IMP is geared to produce a display update whenever the user
        depresses ENTER on the keyboard without any accompanying text.
        Therefore, a HELP or GLOSSARY panel is only ever displayed after
        explicit action by the user.  The user can use the subcommands
        mentioned above or the corresponding PF Keys.  (PF1/PF13
        requests the HELP panel while PF2/PF14 can be used to request
        GLOSSARY information.)  To return to the detail display of the
        current option the user merely selects ENTER.  Note that
        PF3/PF15 is not needed to end the HELP or GLOSSARY display.
        PF3/PF15 ALWAYS means "terminate IMP".  It also follows that
        requests for consecutive GLOSSARY panels must be made
        explicitly, this being done most easily with PF2/PF14.  If a
        user knows that relevant information is contained on Glossary
        page 4, for example, then this page can be displayed directly by
        with the '!4' subcommand, or by entering '4' with PF2/PF14.
           Users who wish to "travel" directly from one option to
        another can use the '=' (equals sign) command.  Hence, by
        entering '=E', for example, control can be transferred to option
        "E" without an intervening display of the main menu.  If '=' is
        entered without specifying an option, or if a non-existent or
        unavailable option is selected, then the current option will
        still be exited and the main menu will be displayed.  PF12/PF24
        can be used to specify the '=' function, so that entering 'E'
        with PF12/PF24 will also result in the transfer to option "E".
        If PF12/PF24 is used anywhere within IMP without any
        accompanying text then the main menu will always be displayed.
           As mentioned above, PF3/PF15 can be used to terminate IMP.
        The same result can be achieved with the 'Z' global subcommand,
        and also by specifying '=X'.
           To assist the user in obtaining the desired display as
        quickly as possible, the initial main menu selection can be
        specified when IM is invoked.  If IM is called as a program then
        this selection is specified as the program parameter.  If IM is
        invoked as a TSO command then the selection is specified as the
        TSO command operand.  To demonstrate, consider the example
        where the user would like to display a line for each batch job
        currently running.  The user could invoke IM, select 'A', and
        then issue the 'BJ' local subcommand.  As described above, the
        user can get into option "A" directly without displaying the
        main menu with the TSO command 'IM A'.  To further optimize the
        process, most options can process an initial local subcommand
        before the first display is produced.  It can now be seen that
        the user can specify 'ABJ' from the main menu, or can issue
        'IM ABJ' from TSO READY.

