This screen is used to display the USER ID record for any given user.

RACF ID - This is the user's ID that they use to sign on CICS with.  Using the
          CESN transaction.

BANK ---- This is the default bank number to be used by the report viewing
          program to help determine what reports this user has access to.

BRANCH -- This is the default branch number to be used by the report viewing
          program to help determine what reports this user has access to.

REPORT IDS - These fields are used to control what reports a user has access to
          when using the "REPT" transaction. These report ids are used
          in conjunction with the access to reports field.  See the access to
          reports field for an explanation of the values of that field.





$$$REPU,F,USERDTL
TYPE OF ACCESS TO REPORTS - The value of this field will determine what reports
          a user can view with the "REPT" transaction.  The valid values for
          this field are listed below.

  "N" - No access at all to the report viewing system.
  "A" - Access to all reports and all banks and branches.
  "B" - Access to one bank and any branch.  This option does not restrict access
        by report ID only bank number.  You may view any report for the bank
        number in the user's ID record.
  "R" - Access to one bank and one branch.  This option does not restrict access
        by report ID only bank and branch number.  You may view any report for
        the bank number and branch number in the user's ID record.
  "C" - Access to one bank and any branch and the report ids listed.  This
        option restricts access by report ID and bank number.  You may view only
        the reports listed in the user's ID record for the bank number in the
        user's ID record.
  "D" - Access to one bank and one branch and the report ids listed.  This
        option restricts access by report ID, bank number and branch number.
        You may view only the reports listed in the user's ID record for the
        bank number and branch number in the user's ID record.
$$$REPU,M,USERDTL

UPDATE ACCESS TO SECURITY RECORDS - The value of this field will determine the
          type of access a user has to this transaction or the USERID (security)
          file.  The valid values for this are listed below.

  "N" - No access at all to the report viewing system USERID records.
  "A" - Access to all USER ID records for all banks and branches
  "B" - Access to all USER ID records for one bank and any branch.  This option
        will restrict access to only one bank number.
  "R" - Access to all USER ID records for one bank and one branch.  This option
        will restrict access to only one bank and one branch number.









$$$REPU,L,USERDTL
  This is a transaction to display, list, add, or change a USER ID record.
There are six options.  Just enter the number of the option you want to use and
press the enter key.  Listed below is an explanation of the options and the
other fields that appear on the screen.

Option  -------- Enter into this field the number of the option you wish to use.
USER ID or LIST- This is the USER ID you which to deal with.   Or a prefix to be
               used as a starting point for a search or list(option 2).

Option 1 - This option will add a new USER ID record to the file.  The USER ID
           must be entered into the USER ID field for this option.

Option 2 - This option will display a list of the user ids on file.  You may put
           in a starting prefix with this option.  You may select the user id
           you want to look at from the screen that is produced by this option.

Option 3 - This option will copy an existing user id record and create a new
           user id record.  The user id (existing user id) must be entered into
           the USER ID field for this option.

$$$REPU,F,USERSTL

Option 4 - Display a USER ID record.  The USER ID must be entered into the USER
           ID field for this option.

Option 5 - Update a USER ID record.  The USER ID must be entered into the USER
           ID field for this option.

Option 6 - Delete a USER ID record.  The USER ID must be entered into the USER
           ID field for this option.











$$$REPU,L,USERSTL
This screen will display a list of all the user ids available for your RACF ID.
You may select a user id from this screen.  There are four selection options
that are available from this screen.  They are listed below.  Just enter the
letter of the option you wish to use in the field next to the user id you want.

Options
  C - Place a "C" in the field next to the user id you want to copy.  This will
      select the user id as the record to be copied and will start up the copy
      function.  It will return the COPY FUNCTION screen.

  D - Place a "D" in the field next to the user id you want to see.  This will
      select the user id record to be displayed.  It will return DISPLAY screen.

  U - Place a "U" in the field next to the user id you want to update.  This
      will select the user id as the record to be updated and will start up the
      update function. It will return the UPDATE FUNCTION screen.

  Z - Place a "Z" in the field next to the user id you want to delete.  This
      will select the user id as the record to be deleted and will start up the
      delete function. It will return the DELETE FUNCTION screen.
$$$REPU,O,USERBRS

