         NOTE ON MEMBERS H312W32 and H312W64
         ---- -- ------- ------- --- -------

If Hercules Version 3.08 will suffice for your purpses,
see CBT File 889.  If you need Hercules 3.12, see below.

These members apply to Hercules under WINDOWS.  Not applicable
to running Hercules under other platforms.  To do those, go to
the respective Hercules websites mentioned immediately below.

These members are the zip files from Roger Bowler's site, and
contain Hercules Version 3.12 in 32-bit and 64-bit versions.
Website:   http://www.hercules-390.eu/
This is Roger Bowler's latest version of Hercules.  I believe
that Version 3.xx of Hercules has been functionally stabilized
at this time.

However, there is a Hercules Version 4.x.x that is being worked
on, but it is somewhat different from the 3.x.x versions, and
the configuration statements for 4.x.x are somewhat different,
as well.  Please Google Hercules Emulator Version 4.  Its
website currently listed:  https://hercules-390.github.io/html/

This will enable you to run a guest operating system without
TCPIP.  In order to incorporate TCPIP, see below:

Please note that David Trout's DLLs and stuff for CTC, which
allows you to do TCPIP to and from the guest operating system,
have not been copied to these members, because they take up a
lot of room, and really, Dave would prefer if you spent a small
amount of money on his newest versions, and you purchase this
from him:    www.softdevlabs.com

I highly recommend, for accuracy, that you purchase a copy of
CTC-WIN from   www.softdevlabs.com   and install it separately.
It should install fine on Windows, and everything should go into
the proper directories.

However, Dave gave me permission to put his earlier version,
which still works, on the CBT Tape, and it is bundled into
member HERC306.  You'll have the responsibility for picking
out which pieces in the zip file belong to this package.
Maybe compare with the members in H312W32 or H312W64 and get
the files that don't seem to belong to "native Hercules".
(No guarantees here.)

In order to do TCPIP, you'll also need to instally WINPCAP on
your PC.  A version of WinPcap is included here, as member
WINPCAP.  It must be downloaded to a PC in binary, and installed
from there.  I think it is an .exe file.

Best of luck.

