
This PDS contains two programs that are typically available
on UNIX systems,  the `what' program and the `grep' program.

You should find the following:

        grep@c   -    The C source code for a grep clone,
                      originally taken from the DECUS tape.  Modified
                      for running under OS/390.

        grep@a   -    The assembly source generated with the Systems/C
                      compiler.

        what@c   -    The C source code for the `what' program, from the
                      Berkely distribution.  Modified for running under
                      OS/390

        what@a   -    The assembly source generated with the Systems/C
                      compiler.

We have included the assembly source for these programs in case
someone wants to "pull out" one of the routines (particularly, the
regular expression routines in grep) for inclusion in other programs.
You should be able to extract the function, adjust the prologue/epilogue
correctly and include these in your own programs.   The code is non-rent,
and uses R12 as the base register and R13 as the frame base register.
You should replace DCCPRLG and DCCEPIL with the appropriate function
entry/exit macros.  The FRAMESIZE parameter on DCCPRLG indicates how
much dynamic storage the routine will need.

However, you should be able to compile the C source with other C compiler
implementations for the mainframe.

Also, if you want to download the executables, we have them on our
web site - http://www.dignus.com

Just what are these?

  GREP:
        General Regular Expression Processor.

                Read a file, looking for lines that match a specified
                pattern.

  WHAT:
        show what versions of object modules were used to construct a file

                On some source management systems, it's possible to embed
                embed an ID string in the source which will then appear
                in the object deck or load module for a program.   This
                ID usually contains the file name, revisision number,
                check-in date, etc...

                Thus, using WHAT, you can scan an object deck, or load
                module, and be able to determine just which version of the
                source was used to build that object.

                From the Berkely manual page:
                        The what utility searches each specified
                        file for sequences of the form "@(#)" as
                        inserted by the source code control system.
                        It prints the remainder of the string following
                        this marker, up to a NUL character, newline,
                        double quote, ``>'' character, or backslash.

                        The following option is available:

                        -s      Stop searching each file after the
                                first match.

                        Exit status is 0 if any matches were found,
                        otherwise 1.

