./        ADD LIST=ALL,NAME=M000001
$DEL M000001
H M000001 D=APR88
T 03Feb93 - How to use this INFO file.
K ARGUMENT HELP INFO JES3 KEYWORD MESSAGE MSG MVS SEARCH VM

This file contains a series of entries which may be of help to
operations in resolving and correcting system related problems.

The entries are searchable by keyword. Given a problem, enter search
argument(s) (keywords) describing the problem. Entries containing those
keywords will be displayed, if found. Select appropriate entries for
detailed explanations for the situation and suggested resolution.

e.g. You have a problem with the JES3 console not rolling.
Enter the search command 'SEA =1 JES3 CONSOLE' to select all entries
relating to JES3 and CONSOLE.

If no title lines are displayed enter a less restrictive search argument
and try again. e.g. in the above case try 'SEA =1 JES3' or 'SEA =1 CONSOLE'.

A HINT: If you want to search for a message identifier use the
search keyword MSGaaannn e.g. to search for message IAT8572 enter
'SEA =1 MSGIAT8572'.

Entry M000003 is a list of the entries sorted by last updated date.
Browse this list to see which entries have been changed most recently.

The entry naming convention is as follows:

      Mnnnnnn - MVS information
      Onnnnnn - OS/2 information
      Vnnnnnn - VM information
$EOM
./        ADD LIST=ALL,NAME=M000002
$DEL M000002
H M000002 D=JUL90
T 20Jul90 - Creating user entries for this database.
K CREATING DATABASE ENTRIES FORMAT INFO MVS USER

The format of each entry in the Information/MVS database is as follows:

1. One header line (H line).

   The header line must contain an H in the first data column, followed
   by a blank. The entry identifier, consisting of a letter and 6
   numbers (0-9) must start in the third column. The letter you
   specify is the name of the logical file in which you want the entry
   to be contained. Entry identifiers must be assigned in ascending
   sequence. However, contiguous numbers are not required.

   The H and the entry identifier are the only data required in the
   header line. An optional parameter is:

   D=mmmyy The date on which you place the entry in the database, or
   the date on which you last modified the entry. Any other data on the
   H line is ignored, but stored as part of the H line in the database.

2. One or more title lines (T lines)

   The title line(s) follow the H line. The title must contain a T in
   the first data column followed by a blank. You can enter any number
   of title lines; however Info/Sys can display a maximum of 201
   characters of data. A typical entry has one or two lines. You must
   have at least one T line.

3. One or more keyword lines (K lines and/or L Lines)

   The keyword lines follow the T lines. Keyword lines are optional.
   The keyword lines, if present, must contain a K or L in the first
   data column followed by a blank. Any number of K lines can be
   entered. These lines contain all the keywords by which this entry
   can be located through a keyword search.

4. One blank line (a separator line)

   A blank line must separate the last keyword line from the first
   text line.

5. One or more text lines (the text entry itself)

   You can use as many text lines as you require. A text line cannot
   contain a $EOM starting in the first column.

6. One $EOM line (an end line)

   A line containing $EOM starting in the first column must be the last
   line of an entry.

The header, title, keyword and text lines can be limited to 78
characters of input, so that it can be displayed on a single line on
the screen. The data in the records can be mixed upper and lowercase.
However the output of the H, T, L and K lines will be uppercase.

Optionally the entry may be preceeded with a $DEL fnnnnnn so that an
old entry will be deleted before it is replaced with a new entry.
$EOM
./        ADD LIST=ALL,NAME=M000614
$DEL M000614
H M000614 D=AUG03
T 21Aug03 - Determining instruction mnemonics using IPCS.
K INSTRUCTION IPCS MNEMONIC

To translate an instruction to determine its mnemonic you can
use the IPCS command OPCODE.

  e.g. OPCODE A7A80073

       displays Mnemonic for X'A7A80073' is LHI
$EOM
