Normal disclaimer, this program is provided free of charge
and no warranty is made as to its fitness for any particular
purpose.  The author assumes no liability resulting from
the use or misuse of these programs.


This distribution contains 3 files.

flexcli.notes - this file

flexcli.xmi   - the mvs side of the program.
                ftp this program to an mvs system
                run
                RECEIVE INDS(flexcli.xmi)
                to recreate the PDS.  The PDS contains
                the programs, JCL to compile the program,
                sample JCL to use the program, and a sample
                listing truncated to 80 bytes wide.

    (Note:  The MVS part has already been received, and consists
            of members:

            $COMPILE $SAMPOUT $SAMPRUN ASMSRC COS001A
            COS001B  DSSDUMP  LINKDATE PLISRC             )

flexescli_inetd.tar  - The unix (linux) side of the program
                designed to run under xinetd.  The comments at
                the beginning of flexescli_inetd.c describe how
                to set the program up for use with xinetd.

    (Note:  This tar file is member TAR in this pds.  In order
            to use it, you have to download it to the Linux side
            of the FLEX-ES system in BINARY and un-tar it
            there.    SBG 03/05)

Note:  The flexescli_inetd program, by way of xinetd is listening
on a port.  The MVS side of the program will contact the
flexescli_inetd program using the IP address of the UNIX side
of the system and the port.  The MVS side has the port 19999 coded
into it as a default although it can be overridden with the
port= parameter to the main parm string.

The port on the Unix side is specified in /etc/services.  The
update to /etc/services is shown in flexescli_inetd.c using the
port 19999.  You may wish to use a different port.  If you use a
different port, update the MVS program (member PLISRC) to reflect
the new port.  You will probably update it to change the default IP
address to the correct value on your system.

If you have any questions, feel free to contact me:

Robert Styma    stymar@lucent.com,    styma@swlink.net

