:gdoc.
.*
.CM LIB: XDBS.MVSESA.SCRIPT(SINGLE)
.CM GDE: ibm2
.CM DOC: THIS SCRIPT FILE IS THE DOCUMENT FOR
.CM      Single System Methodology at CDCSA.
.*
.DD IMBEDS DSN 'XSYS.MVSESA.IMBEDS(IMBEDS)'
.IM IMBEDS
.*
:titlep.
:title stitle='SINGLE'.
SINGLE SYSTEM METHODOLOGY
:docnum.&gml. Single
:date.
:author.Jack Corbett
:address.
:aline.Computer and Data Communications Services Agency
:aline.111 8th Avenue
:aline.New York, New York  10011
:eaddress.
:etitlep.
.*
.rightpg
:body.
:h0.Single Image
.*
.rightpg
:h1.Dataset Propagation (Past)
:p.In the past maintenance was recieved to the Global Zone and then applied
to a Target Zone. The target zone resided on one volume and the target
libraries resided on another. Normally this procedure was done on a test
system, the test system was then IPL'ed, and a majority of the production
applications were tested. At this point we were ready to migrate to the
production environment. We would take the current resident volume, 'LIVE',
run a full backup copy to a spare or alternate system volume. Then look
to see the libraries that were affected by the maintenance, and individually
copy these datasets to this cloned production volume. The last step would be
to clip this volume, reformat, to the same name as the current spinning
system volume. Operations would IPL off of this unique volid, and if the
system functioned properly, we would remain running off of the new maintenance.
After a week or two we would then copy the target CSI (Consolidated Software
Inventory) to the production CSI, so that zones a libraries were in sync.
.sk 2
:p. Disadvantages include&gml
:ol.
:li.Integrity of SMP/E Zones with affected libraries.
:li.Manual dataset copy function, possibility of missed maintenance.
:eol.
.*
.rightpg
:h1.Single Image Propagation (Present)
:p.About a year ago, the Department of Finance Data Center was migrated from
Tampa, IBM Remote Services Site, to CDCSA. At this time both DOF and CDCSA
were running off of an ESA platform. Unfortunately software products and/or
system maintenance were not at the same level. This presented a difficult
task for any systems group to maintain. So, a project was developed which
would take all of the MVS BASE system software from both agencies, taking
the highest version of a product, and combine them into a system resident
volume that could be used by both agencies at any given time. We decided
that the Global and Distribution Libraries (DLIBs) and Zones would be on
seperate volumes, and that the Target Libraries and Zone would be placed
on the resident volume. Maintenance would be applied to the test environment,
MVS Guests systems running under VM (MVSX & DOFX), a resident volume with
which both systems, simultaneously, would be IPL'ed from. After testing some
applications which simulate their production counterparts, the maintenance
is ready to be copied into the DOF development system (DOFD). After a few
days the same maintenance volume/level is cloned to the DOF production
system DOFP, and finally to the CDCSA production system (MVSP). This
full volume clone can only be achieved because all systems are using a "READ
ONLY" resident volume strategy. All volitale datasets are moved to other
volumes.
.sk 2
:p.Advantages of Single Image&gml.
:ol.
:li.Indirect cataloging of datasets.
:li.Synchronization of target zones and target libraries.
:li.Reliabilty of system maintenance being propagated.
:eol.
.*
:appendix.
:backm.
.pa
.ll
.sp
.am
.cd 1
.sx C //***** End of Document *****//
:egdoc.
