How to setup point and shoot in ISPF panel table headers

There are times where an ISPF panel needs to support point and shoot
logic and this is a simple way to do it. The reason for doing it this
way is that you can control the intens, color, caps, justification,
and hilite for the field.

1. define some attributes
   # type(output) intens(high) caps(off) just(left) pas(on) hilite(uscore)
   ¨ type(output) intens(high) caps(off) just(asis) pas(on) hilite(uscore)

   Use the appropriate attribute based on the justification.  In some cases
   you will want to use left justification and in others you need specific
   placement so asis justification is what you need.

2. Use them in the table header
  #Name+       Gen  Abs#CRdate  ¨MDdate        +V.M  #Size+

   In this example both left and asis justification are used. Some of the
   headers are not defined for point and shoot (e.g. GEN Abs, V.M). The
   rest are defined for left justification except the MDdate which is
   defined using asis justification.

   Or use them within a panel

   Enter value:_val#xyz+

3. Define the output variable values in the )INIT section
   &name   = 'Name'
   &crdate = 'Created'
   &mddate = '    Changed  '
   &size   = 'Size'

   &xyz    = 'XYZ'

   As you can see all of the variable names match the output variable name
   in the header row. The &mddate has leading and trailing blanks so that
   it fills out the space in the header so the fields are aligned where
   they need to be.

4. Define the Point and shoot
)PNTS
FIELD(name)     VAR(ZCMD) VAL('SORT NAME')
FIELD(crdate)   VAR(ZCMD) VAL('SORT CREATED')
FIELD(mddate)   VAR(ZCMD) VAL('SORT CHANGED')
FIELD(size)     VAR(ZCMD) VAL('SORT SIZE')

FIELD(xyz )     VAR(ZCMD) VAL('SET XYZ')

In the )PNTS (point and shoot) section the syntax is:

   FIELD(variable name)
   This defines the variable of a point and shoot field in the
   ISPF display.

   VAR(variable)
   This defines the variable to be set when the point and shoot field
   is selected. In this case ZCMD will be updated and passed to the
   application.

   VAL(value)
   The value is the text that will be inserted into the variable defined
   in VAR(). Enclose in quotes if more than one word or if spaces are
   included in the text.

And assuming your dialog understands the zcmd values you're good to
go.

One way to do this so that the panel gets updated but the processing
code doesn't go is this technique which
assumes that the point and shoot field sets ZCMD to a value of 'SET XYZ' and
that causes the code to set panel variable to 'X', reset zcmd to null, and then
interate which redisplays the panel.

   Do forever
   Display Panel(xxx)
   If rc > 0 then leave (PF3 or END)
   if word(zcmd,1) = 'SET' then do
      if word(zcmd,2) = 'XYZ' then val = 'X'
      zcmd = ''
      iterate
      end
   end
   --- processing goes here

Notes:

1. A point and shoot (pns) field that is defined as an output field will
   be automatically converted to an input field if tab to point and
   shoot is enabled (it probably is by default). That means that when
   the user tabs to the field that they can type anything in it before
   they hit enter. Nothing happens and the variable is not updated or
   affected. This is just the way it works per IBM ISPF L3.
