OS  (OnScreen - File Browser)

OS allows users to view sequential files, PDSs, PDSEs, and VSAM files
of most types and VTOCs.

The purpose of OS is to allow data to not only be viewed in plain text,
but also to be 'formatted'.  The design of OS allows new formats to
be added easily.  Some types of data common to most all MVS (OS/390,
z/OS or whatever it is called now) systems like SMF are already known
(at least some SMF record types).

The utility determines the data set's DSORG dynamically.  That is it
determines if the data set is sequential, a PDS, VSAM, etc and uses
the appropriate access method.

If a PDS or PDSE is referenced without a member name, a list of the
members is displayed.  PDS(/E)s with RECFM U are assumed to be
"loadlibs", all other RECFMs are "non loadlibs".

Data from the data set or directory is read into a data space before
being displayed.  This has its advantages and disadvantes.  On the
plus side, file I/O is only required once.  You can scroll forward,
backward, reference anything read into the data space with the system
doing any required I/O via system paging which has less overhead and
is faster than file I/O.  On the negative side, if the data is too
large to be loaded into the data space, only a portion can be OS'd
at a time.  There are options on invocation that allow you to specify
records to skip, number of records to read, and for VSAM files you
can use FROMKEY and TOKEY or RBA for positioning.
(I intend to add the FROMKEY and TOKEY someday!)
The system defualt for the dataspace's size is 239 pages.  I intend
to add a keyword to allow users to request a larger dataspace.




I tried to keep the hard-coded message text to a minimum.  Since I
am only (somewhat) literate in Enligsh (United States variety),
the only messages provided now are English.  If anyone wants to
take on translating the messages, the source for US english is
in source OSMSGUS.  The language you use can be customized on a
user by user basis.  The options are kept in member OS of the
ISPPROF data set.  If you do create a new messages module, don't
forget to add it to the assemble and link-edit JCL.
I suppose you could even translate the text in the SPF panels.













Other odds/ends
As of now, OS depends on SPF.  I have been looking at 'faking out'
the SPF functions.

I plan on allowing you to enter "OS" as a primary command so you
can start a new "session" on a new data set.


I work at a JES3 shop.  We don't have any JES2 SMF data so I don't
have much motivation for worrying about formatting any SMF records
that would be created by JES2.


I have been thinking about OSing storage.  This would allow
formatting of in storage control blocks.  Anyone know much about
cross memory stuff?  Anyone know how to get the ALET for another
address space?  Is using ALETs and the access registers even
possible for accessing data in another address space?


OS really doesn't 'know' much about tapes.  In the last several
years the use of tape has declined drastically here.  The older
round-reels were notorious for causing problems.  The main purpose
for developing DITTO was for messing around with tapes.  By the
way DO NOT USE DITTO on any system later than about MVS 3 (ESA).
On anything later, DITTO CLOBBERS something and the system becomes
unusable requiring an IPL.


Commands can be recalled via a question mark (?).
Up to the last 20 commands can be recalled.


You can see the contents of various fields in the common area by
entering DEBUG as a primary command.







FORMATs

When a sequential file is first displayed, it is shown using the
default format which is BROWSE.  PDS(/E) directories are displayed
as member lists.  You can change which format is being used by
entering "FORMAT nnnnnnnn" as a primary command.


Formats are defined by members in the OSFORMAT library.

As supplied the formats available are:
 BROWSE        Displays data 'a-line-at-a-time' that allows up, down,
               left, and right scrolling.

 DIR           Used to display non-loadlib PDS(/E) directories

 HEX           Displays data as two hex characters per byte.  The
               display allows scrolling up, down, left, and right.

 LDIR          Used to display loadlib PDS(/E) directories.

 RVTOC         Displays VTOC info in "raw" form.

 SMF           Assumes the data is SMF data.  Most SMF record types
               have customized displays.  Some records have multiple
               "screens".  "up" and "down" scrolls records, "left"
               and "right" change "screens" for a given record.


 VHEX          Displays data in 'vertical'  hex.  Each record is

 VTOC          Displays data sets on a volume.






OS does not require APF authorization and does not update data sets.

It does not do much to verify data is valid (like packed decimal)
before using it.  If dates in PDS(/E) directores are not valid,
SMF data is not valid, etc, etc, OS will ABEND.  Intercepting ABENDs
is another one of those 'round tuit's.



OS does not update anything, so the best way to learn how to use
it is to just "play around" with it.



