Subject:  Re: Xmit
From:     "Roland Scholz" <roland_scholz@web.de>
Date:     6/16/2012 1:39 AM
To:       "Sam Golob" <sbgolob@cbttape.org>

Hi Sam,

Thanks for putting the stuff on Updates.  I had a quick look at
File 871 and I had done the packaging in the same way.  I also
could download the file to my phone, unzip it there and (with
Xmit) extract the xmit.apk and install it successfully.  Please
include the following description about Xmit:

This is the ultimate app for receiving Xmit files generated on
IBM-mainframes with your android device. You will also need a
file-manager and a text-editor.

I suggest these two free products that can be gotten from Android
(Play) Market:

- OI File Manager
- Jota Text Editor

Xmit lets you display the contents of transmitted sequential and
PDS/E datatsets. The data can be viewed in binary or EBCDIC mode,
alternatively you can request a hex-dump of the data.

I would suggest the following method:

1.) Receive the file871.xmi on the mainframe.
2.) Transfer the Member xmitapk as xmit.apk to desktop computer
    or directly to the phone in binary mode.
1a) Receive file871.xmi on a desktop computer with e.g.
    XmitManager or UnXMIT (from SourceForge).
2a) Connect your phone via USB or cloud and transfer xmit.apk
    from desktop to phone
3a) Select the xmit.apk on the phone, the installation process
    will begin automatically.

The other complementary files should be renamed during
transferring to the original name mentioned below.

I give them away "as is", so if anybody has got a question, he
should send me an email.

I think the Xmit-app is basically self-explanatory:

1) Select a xmit-dataset pressing button Select.
2) Set the radio-boxes either to text or binary mode.
3) Short-click a member to view it in text-editor.
4) Long-click gives you a popup-menu for choosing between viewing
   or extracting the member to sdcard.  Also you can choose a
   hex-dump of the member.

Do you think this is fair enough?

Cheers,
Roland

Roland Scholz <roland_scholz@web.de> schrieb:

