1
-
      The TSO functional accounting enhancement (the RUA11 family of sysmods
      and related programs) was developed to obtain better TSO response time
      information than provided by other products and interfaces.
0     Note that at least MVS/SE2 is required for functional accounting to be
      used.   Also  note that  unless you  have the  TSO Command  Package or
      TSO/E,  no one but  SPF and a few non-IBM products  use the functional
      accounting  interface.  Thus,   without one  of  these products,   you
      probably aren't interested, unless everyone runs under SPF,  or unless
      you are willing to  do some work to add the  interface to vanilla TSO.
      There are two primary changes made:
0     (a)  Functional accounting is changed so that it is no longer required
           to  have a  load  module containing  the  names of  "interesting"
           commands and subcommands.   Instead,  the  first 200 commands and
           subcommands of any sort are recorded.
0     (b)  The fields in the  type 32 detail record that are  defined by IBM
           to contain  SRB time,  number  of TPUTs  and number of  TGETs are
           replaced by  elapsed time,   "quick" elapsed  time,  and  "quick"
           command count respectively.   (A quick  command is defined as one
           which completes without issuing a  TGET;  the total quick elapsed
           time  is the  total elapsed  time  for quick  invocations of  the
           command or subcommand.)
0     The implementation of  part (a)  above requires  a little elaboration.
      The IEEMB846 module (which contains the interesting TSO command names)
      is replaced  by a module which  contains 200 names beginning  with the
      '0'  (zero)   character.    The module  which  accumulates  functional
      accounting data  is changed so that,   whenever it finds  a previously
      unknown command,  it  replaces the first '0' command in  the list with
      the new command.  Thus, by altering the sample version of this module,
      you can increase  or decrease the maximum number  recorded,  or insert
      some commands  at the front  which you want to  be sure to  catch,  no
      matter how many others may occur first.
0     The TSOSUMM program is provided to produce a response time report from
      a batch of SMF data.   It is  written in PASCAL/VS;  if you don't have
      PASCAL/VS,  it should not be that hard  to convert it to PL/I.   (Why,
      you ask,  was it written in PASCAL  in the first place?   I'm glad you
      asked  that  question.)    Sample  JCL for  running  TSOSUMM  is  also
      provided.
0     One optional input  to TSOSUMM is a "CMDIN" data  set,  which provides
      information on alias  command names,  and on translation  of the eight
      character subcommand designators into  command-subcommand pairs.   The
      data in in free format, each card of the format
0          command|command.subcmd alias...
0     The sample  data set is  sorted in  descending order by  command name.
      This results in a slight efficiency improvement, but is not required.
