1
-
      This  document discusses  some  of the  TAPESCAN  features related  to
      security/safety.
0     TAPESCAN must  be installed  as an authorized  program to  function at
      all, as it uses OPEN J to force LABEL=BLP.   TAPESCAN also assumes key
      0 for a brief time in two cases:  when beginning to process a new file
      of  a 7-track  SL  tape,  and  when  sending expiration  date/password
      messages to the operator.  In the former case, key 0 is used to modify
      the  DEB to  change  the  file mask  (since  labels  are written  with
      TRTCH=ET regardless of  the data TRTCH).   In the latter  case,  key 0
      causes the operator prompts to be written  with a "*" flag rather than
      a "@" flag.  If your operators are on their toes, they ought to refuse
      to enter a password in response to  an @-flagged message,  since it is
      likely to be a counterfeit.
0     To avoid damaging  an innocent tape,  TAPESCAN  provides the following
      safety feature:   It  insists that the labelling of an  output tape be
      accurately described in the JCL.   If the tape is SL or AL, the output
      volser  must be  correct.    This minimizes  the  possibility than  an
      incorrect output  tape will be mounted  and destroyed.   By  using the
      UNLABEL option,   you can  ask TAPESCAN  to change  the label  type or
      volser of a tape;  however,  the JCL must accurately describe the tape
      as it exists before TAPESCAN writes to it.
0     TAPESCAN provides  a number of  security-oriented features  to prevent
      its  use  to perform  operations  which  the underlying  system  would
      properly prevent.   These features,  in general,  are only invoked for
      the first file  of a tape,  since the operating  system cannot enforce
      security on a tape unless all files are protected similarly.
0     When writing an output tape,   TAPESCAN simulates OPEN expiration date
      processing (for the first file).
0     For both  input and  output tapes,   TAPESCAN simulates  OPEN password
      processing (for the  first file).   If a tape is  read-protected and a
      valid  password  is  not  given,   TAPESCAN  will  still  print  label
      information,  but will not read or print anything from its data files.
      The password  check is ordinarily  done using the  17-character dsname
      from the data set label;  however,  if a longer dsname is given in the
      JCL which truncates  to the name on  the label,  that name  is checked
      instead.
0     There are "accessibility" flags in ANS  volume and header labels which
      will inhibit  any access other than  via BLP.   TAPESCAN  honors these
      flags and refuses to read or overwrite such a tape.
0     TAPESCAN supports an installation security exit, which is called after
      the volume label and first header label have been read for each of the
      input and output tape.  The exit (named TAPESCUR) is located by WXTRN,
      and need not be  provided if its function is not  required.   The exit
      may allow or prevent access to the  tape.   A sample exit which issues
      an ACF2 user call to determine whether the tape is volume protected is
      provided as an example.
0     The linkage conventions for TAPESCUR are:
0     On entry, register 1 addresses the following parm list:
0     SECDCB    DS    A        address of the open tape DCB
      SECIOTYP  DS    CL1      'I'=input tape, 'O'=output tape
      SECLABEL  DS    CL1      'N'=NL, 'A'=AL, 'S'=SL
      SECDSN    DS    CL17     dsname from label for SL/AL tape
      SECVOL    DS    CL6      volser of tape (from label if SL/AL)
0     On exit, TAPESCUR should put 0 in register 15 to allow access, or some
      other value to deny access.  To improve communication of the problem
      to the user, it is recommended that TAPESCUR not issue an ABEND.
