
                INDEX TO THE MEMBERS OF FILE 570
                ----- -- --- ------- -- ---- ---


       List of tips and tricks available so far (by member name):

       BATISPF  - from Roy Gardiner - hints as to how to run ISPF
                  in batch.

       CLEARSPL - from Dan Schwarz - sometimes "dead jobs" can
                  accumulate and fill up JES2 spool space.  Here's
                  how to look for these jobs, and get rid of them.

                  If your JES2 spool is short on track groups,
                  you should definitely look at this suggestion.

       DUMPCONC - Here's a way to get concurrent dumps from all
                  or several LPARs in a SYSPLEX.

       HOWTO    - A very comprehensive collection of jobs which
                  create most of a z/OS 1.4 system.  Use as a
                  reference to look at, when you need to do
                  something (like, for example, enlarging a RACF
                  database, or allocating a new version of one
                  of the system datasets) which you want to do
                  properly.

       JESJOBNO - Code to get the JES job number.

       PERSAUTH - How to authorize certain TSO commands, only for
                  your own TSO sessions, and not for the other
                  folks at your installation.  It is built on a
                  secret, undocumented TSO principle, which is
                  described here.

       SHOWMACS - Get this from File 492.  There are lots of
                  undocumented control block mappings here.

       SSH      - Some hints as to how to get sshd to work under
                  UNIX services

       SYSDOCB  - Miscellaneous facts about MVS, received from
                  Bruce Bordonaro, representing things he had to
                  do in the past, and he has written down how to
                  do them.  There are some undocumented ways of
                  finding MVS control block information here and
                  there are many other useful tidbits.
                     ** --  Interesting Reading  -- **

       THORNTON - A very large collection of "how to do stuff"
                  from Dick Thornton.  This is basically his
                  MEMORY member from CBT Tape File 564.  It has
                  been included here, because that's what this
                  file is basically about:  a collection of
                  miscellaneous "how to do stuff" things.
                  Some of this material refers to Dick's other
                  files:  CBT Tape Files 558 thru 565.

       UPARMLIB - How to set up an MVS operating system that
                  uses your own "user PARMLIB".  From Dave
                  Kulas.

