Subject: Re: Getting ssh to work
Date: Tue, 1 Jul 2003 16:10:01 -0700 (PDT)
From: Ken Rogers <copter_ken@yahoo.com>
To: Sam Golob <sbgolob@cbttape.org>

    Hi Sam

    Since IBM does not support ssh, it was not impossible with
some assumptions.  First, is that you have SSL up and running
correctly.

    That at least IS supported by IBM.  IN short, get all the
loadlibs with GLD and GSK in linklist.  There are one loadlib of
each.  Running the gskkyman utility on the USS side, would be
next.  IN that directory - /usr/lpp/gskssl/bin - it will walk you
thru how to define a new key ring and key ddatabase as well as
STASH file!  The last is VERY necessary.

    IPL - not just refresh LLA.

    Test your HTTP server for SSL working, modify the CONF file
and you know it works when any page that will be offered off port
80 or 8080 is displayed on port 443.  There will be an
acknowldgement pop up on the browser to accept the server's CA.

    OK, SSL is up.  (Feel free to rejoice!)

    Load the openssh.os390.gz to your MVS's USS off the 'Toys and
Tools' page of IBM.  This can be either direct to USS or to your
PC and then up to the LPAR.  I like the 2 step method so I do not
have to deal with network drops OUTSIDE our firewall.

    Once placed in the USS, and location is not that important,
but remembering where you have stuffed them is, unpack it.  That
can be done either with    gzip -d command or     pax pe -rvf
command.

    Add to RACF the program control entries to the  *  astrisk
profile, that will have CEE.SCEERUN, CEE.SCEEREN2, CBC.SCBLDLL
all sepcified.  Make sure that the RACF ID that runs OMVS is
given read or update to the FACILITY profile for BPX.DAEMON and
BPX.SERVER

    Refresh RACF 3 ways from Sunday or IPL.  The sequence is not
critical, but having all this active at this point is.

    From the expanded GZ file, above is a README.openssh file.
And it is a screen or so large and contains all the specific
requirements from here.

    Make sure the executable in /usr/.../sbin where   sshd  has
shown up, has the USS extra attribure byte on for Program Control
and APF.

    Then generate the keys for ssh to use.  Now these are all
best done my telnet'ng into USS.  I hate that admission but it is
what works best.  The commands for the key generation are in the
README file.  Cut-n-paste the command into your telnet prompt and
they will work just fine.  They might take up to 35 min each but
they will work.

    Start the daemon:   sshd   like the README says...

    And go to a workstation, bring up a putty-32 or so session
and SSH should be a working option.

    I have NO clue (yet) how to get sshd to start at IPL time.
But this will get it going.

    Take care Sam....
      Ken

