              This is the SHARE JES2 Songbook (Year 2001)

                This book is made available for the
                CBT Tape by the SHARE JES2 Committee.

                          (Thanks !!!!)

Introduction and History                                          A
Submitting Songs                                                  A
Preference for Electronically Submitted Lyrics                    A
Media                                                             B
Content                                                           B
Conventions and Notation                                          B
Emphasis, Expansion, and Contraction                              B
Pronunciation, Spelled Words and Numbers                          C
Song Tag Language                                                 C
SONG                                                              C
BY                                                                D
VERSE                                                             D
CHORUS                                                            D
REPEAT                                                            E
Songs                                                             1
Song 001 Amazing Grace                                            1
Song 002 The Battle Hymn of the Republic (No. 1)                  1
Song 003 Auld Lang Syne (No. 1)                                   1
Song 004 Bicycle Built for Two (No. 1)                            2
Song 005 California, Here I Come (No. 1)                          2
Song 006 Blowin' In The Wind                                      3
Song 007 Heigh Ho, Heigh Ho                                       3
Song 008 Bye Bye Love                                             3
Song 009 The Christmas Song (Chestnuts Roasting on the Open Fire) 4
Song 010 California, Here I Come (No. 2)                          4
Song 011 The Daring Young Man On The Flying Trapeze (No. 1)       4
Song 012 HASP Medley (No. 1)                                      5
Song 013 Home On the Range (No. 1)                                6
Song 014 Look What They've Done To My Song                        6
Song 015 I Write The Songs                                        7
Song 016 It's A Small, Small World (No. 1)                        7
Song 017 Let It Be                                                8
Song 018 Mame                                                     8
Song 019 My Country Tis of Thee (No. 1) (God Save The Queen)      9
Song 020 MTA (No. 1)                                             10
Song 021 Sidewalks of New York                                   10
Song 022 My Favorite Things                                      11
Song 023 Sweet Violets                                           11
Song 024 Oh What a Beautiful Morning                             12
Song 025 Praise God From Whom All Blessings Flow                 12
Song 026 Rubber Ducky                                            13
Song 027 Seventy-Six Trombones                                   13
Song 028 Take Me Out To The Ball Game                            14
Song 029 The Wiffenpoof Song                                     14
Song 030 There Is A Tavern in The Town                           15
Song 031 Those Were The Days (No. 1)                             15
Song 032 Those Were The Days (No. 2)                             16
Song 033 Waltzing Matilda                                        16
Song 034 The Yellow Rose of Texas                                17
Song 035 Windmills of Your Mind                                  17
Song 036 Yesterday (No. 1)                                       18
Song 037 Yellow Submarine                                        18
Song 038 America The Beautiful (No. 1)                           19
Song 039 Bicycle Built for Two (No. 2)                           19
Song 040 America The Beautiful (No. 2)                           20
Song 041 Joy To The World                                        20
Song 042 Plop, Plop, Fiz, Fiz                                    21
Song 043 I Am The Very Model Of A Modern Major General           21
Song 044 Lucille                                                 21
Song 045 The Alphabet Song                                       22
Song 046 Mickey Mouse Club                                       22
Song 047 Four Leaf Clover                                        22
Song 048 Jingle Bells                                            22
Song 049 My Bonnie Lies Over The Ocean (No. 1)                   23
Song 050 Ever Onward, IBM                                        23
Song 051 Sweet Georgia Brown                                     24
Song 052 Stout-hearted Men                                       24
Song 053 Goodnight Irene                                         24
Song 054 I've Been Working on the Railroad                       25
Song 055 Home On the Range (No. 2)                               26
Song 056 Down by the Old Mill Stream                             26
Song 057 Clementine                                              26
Song 058 HASP Medley (No. 2)                                     27
Song 059 You Are My Sunshine                                     27
Song 060 Yessir, That's My Baby                                  27
Song 061 Tea for Two                                             28
Song 062 Hello Dolly                                             28
Song 063 Exodus                                                  28
Song 064 Big D                                                   29
Song 065 Whoop-de-do Polka                                       29
Song 066 Ghost Riders in the Sky                                 29
Song 067 Far Above Cayuga's Waters                               30
Song 068 I Got Rhythm                                            30
Song 069 Jesus Loves Me                                          30
Song 070 Old MacDonald Had a Farm (No. 1)                        31
Song 071 Side By Side (No. 1)                                    32
Song 072 It's A Small, Small World (No. 2)                       32
Song 073 Has Anybody Seen My Gal?                                33
Song 074 If I Had a Hammer (No. 1)                               33
Song 075 Joy To the World                                        34
Song 076 It's Been A Long, Long Time (No. 1)                     34
Song 077 It's Been A Long, Long Time (No. 2)                     34
Song 078 Mary Had a Little Lamb                                  35
Song 079 Let The Sun Shine Out                                   35
Song 080 Hi Lilly                                                36
Song 081 Lemon Tree                                              36
Song 082 Will The Circle Be Unbroken                             37
Song 083 Twelve Days of Christmas                                37
Song 084 Twelve Days of Christmas (No. 2)                        38
Song 085 The Old Settler's Song                                  39
Song 086 God Bless America                                       40
Song 087 Ma±ana                                                  41
Song 088 Greensleeves                                            41
Song 089 Let Me Call You Sweetheart                              42
Song 090 Old MacDonald Had a Farm (No. 2)                        42
Song 091 If I Had a Hammer (No. 2)                               43
Song 092 Bloody Mary is the Girl I Love                          43
Song 093 Nothin' like a Dame                                     43
Song 094 Side By Side (No. 2)                                    44
Song 095 The Bowery                                              44
Song 096 Those Were The Days (No. 3)                             45
Song 097 Yesterday (No. 2)                                       46
Song 098 Take This Job and Shove It                              46
Song 099 The Policeman's March (Pirates of Penzance)             47
Song 100 Car 54 Where Are You ?                                  48
Song 101 This Land is Your Land                                  48
Song 102 Battle Hymn of the Republic (No. 2)                     48
Song 103 Sixteen Tons (No. 1)                                    49
Song 104 I Don't Want No More of Army Life                       49
Song 105 Boney Fingers (MVS is Breaking My Heart)                50
Song 106 The Mickey Mouse Club Theme                             53
Song 107 The Happy Wanderer                                      53
Song 108 Military Hymn Medley                                    54
Song 109 Suicide Is Painless                                     54
Song 110 Notre Dame Fight Song                                   55
Song 111 When I'm Sixty-Four                                     56
Song 112 Ode to Joy (Beethoven)                                  56
Song 113 Swannee                                                 57
Song 114 Hello Muddah, Hello Faddah                              57
Song 115 All in Family Theme (Those Were the Days)               57
Song 116 This Bud's for You (Budweiser Jingle)                   58
Song 117 Puff the Magic Dragon                                   58
Song 118 I'm a Lumberjack and I'm OK (Monty Python)              59
Song 119 MTA (No. 2)                                             60
Song 120 When Johnny Comes Marching Home                         61
Song 121 There's No Business Like Show Business                  62
Song 122 Way Down Yonder in New Orleans                          62
Song 123 When You Wish Upon A Star (No. 1)                       63
Song 124 There's a Hole in the Bucket                            63
Song 125 Oh The Farmer and the Cowman Should be Friends          64
Song 126 The Sounds of Silence                                   65
Song 127 A Chorus Line                                           65
Song 128 The Canadian Railroad Trilogy (The American SPOOLER Trilogy) 66
Song 129 My Bonnie Lies Over the Ocean (No. 2)                   68
Song 130 Happy Birthday to You                                   68
Song 131 On the Street Where You Live                            68
Song 132 Pick a Bale O'Cotton                                    69
Song 133 Officer Krupke (West Side Story)                        70
Song 134 If I Only Had a Brain (The Wizard of Oz)                72
Song 135 Home On the Range (No. 3)                               73
Song 136 George M. Cohan Medley                                  74
Song 137 Sixteen Tons (No. 2)                                    75
Song 138 Music, Music, Music                                     75
Song 139 Twelve Days of Christmas (No. 2)                        76
Song 140 Santa Claus is Coming to Town                           77
Song 141 Three Blind Mice                                        78
Song 142 Yesterday (No. 3)                                       79
Song 143 My Country 'Tis of Thee (No. 2)                         80
Song 144 Mamas Don't Let Your Babies Grow Up to be Cowboys       80
Song 145 New York, New York                                      81
Song 146 The Brady Bunch (TV Theme)                              81
Song 147 Happy Wanderer (No. 2)                                  81
Song 148 My Country Tis of Thee (No. 1)                          82
Song 149 Daring Young Men on the Flying Trapeze (No. 2)          83
Song 150 I Wish I Were an Oscar Mayer Wiener (TV Jingle)         83
Song 151 Auld Lang Syne (No. 2)                                  83
Song 152 When You Wish Upon a Star (No. 2)                       84
Song 153 Homeward Bound (Simon & Garfunkel)                      84
Song 154 Dixie                                                   85
Song 155 Ding Dong the Witch is Dead (from the Wizard of Oz)     86
Song 156 Hello, Young Lovers (from the King and I)               86
Song 157 Old MacDonald Had A Farm (No. 3)                        87
Song 158 Somewhere Over the Rainbow (from the Wizard of Oz)      88
Song 159 Follow the Yellow Brick Road (from the Wizard of Oz)    88
Song 160 How Much is That Doggie in the Window                   88
Song 161 Bicycle Built for Two (No. 3)                           89
Song 162 Don't Fence Me In                                       89
Song 163 Pack Up Your Troubles                                   90
Song 164 Row, Row, Row Your Boat                                 90
Song 165 Clementine (No. 2)                                      91
Song 166 'Til We Meet Again                                      92
Song 167 Beverly Hillbillies                                     92
Song 168 Taps                                                    94
Song 169 The Band Played On                                      94
Song 170 Thanks for the Memories                                 94
Song 171 Silent Night                                            95
Song 172 The Lion Sleeps Tonight                                 95
Song 173 I'm Gettin' Married in the Mornin'                      97
Song 174 Kids (from Bye Bye Birdie)                              97
Song 175 Never on Sunday                                         98
Song 176 Jingle Bells (No. 2)                                    98
Song 177 Scarlet Ribbons                                         99
Song 178 Beverly Hillbillies (No. 2)                             99
Song 179 Tie A Yellow Ribbon Round the Old Oak Tree              99
Song 180 Funiculi, Funicula                                     100
Song 181 Piano Man                                              100
Song 182 California Girls                                       101
Song 183 Cheers                                                 102
Song 184 50 Ways To Leave Your Lover                            103
Song 185 The City of New Orleans                                104
Song 186 Climb Every Mountain                                   106
Song 187 I'm Leaving on a Jet Plane                             106
Song 188 Amazing Grace (No. 2)                                  107
Song 189 Yesterday (No. 4)                                      108
Song 190 CICS Medley (No. 1)                                    108
Song 191 Lying Eyes                                             109
Song 192 Oh Tannenbaum                                          110
Song 193 Do You Know Where You're Going To (Theme from Mahogany) 110
Song 194 She's A Grand Old Flag                                 111
Song 195 It's My CICS on Everything (Clementine)                112
Song 196 Hursley, England Has A Plan (Old MacDonald Had a Farm) 112
Song 197 Twelve Bugs of Christmas (Twelve Days of Christmas)    113
Song 198 CICS the Bountiful (America the Beautiful)             114
Song 199 Bye Bye Source Code (Bye Bye Blackbird)                115
Song 200 I Have a CICS, You Have a CICS (Funiculi, Funicula)    115
Song 201 Achy Breaky Heart                                      115
Song 202 Zip a - dee doo - dah                                  116
Song 203 Yesterday (No. 5)                                      116
Song 204 I Have Been Under a DC Blunder (Four Leaf Clover)      116
Song 205 On Top of 2000 (On Top of Ol Smokey)                   117
Song 206 Gilligans Island                                       118
Song 207 Write in C (Let it Be)                                 118
Song 208 Hey Jude                                               119
Song 209 Auld Lang Syne (No. 3)                                 120
Song 210 California, Here I Come (No. 3)                        120
Song 211 Auld Lang Syne (Traditional)                           121
Song 212 MTA (No. 3)                                            121
Song 213 We've Only Just Begun                                  121
Song 214 California, Here I Come (No. 4)                        122
Song 215 My Country 'Tis of Thee (No. 4)                        122
Song 216 Winter Wonderland                                      123
Song 217 She's A Grand Old Flag (No. 2)                         123
Song 218 It's My CICS on Everything (Clementine)                123

Alphabetic Song Index                                             1

Introduction and History

The SHARE Esprit de Corps session, more commonly known as the SHARE or
HASP sing-along has been a fixture at SHARE meetings for over 30
years.  It is traditionally held on Thursday night of SHARE week in a
corner of the ballroom in which SCIDS is held.  It is probably the
most widely and consistently attended session at SHARE except for the
General Session and is certainly one of the longest running regularly
scheduled sessions in SHARE history.  The sing-along tradition began
informally when a small group of loyal HASP users (the predecessor to
JES2) and IBMers would gather in one corner of SCIDS around a piano
to sing old camp songs and familiar melodies with lyrics they had
"adjusted" to topics appropriate to HASP and SHARE.  In the spring of
1970 in New York the sing-along appeared for the first time in the
SHARE agenda under the title HASP Project Esprit de Corps.  The
sing-along has had its share of ups and downs.  A few SHARE meetings
have been without the session for one reason or another and most of
the original organizers and supporters have left the industry,
retired, or no longer attend SHARE.  But for the most part the
tradition has grown and remained a high-point of SHARE week.  Some of
the song lyrics in this book may seem a bit mysterious and arcane to
many of you newer to the "systems" business and SHARE.  Back in the
"good old days" we sang about "readers" and "writers" and pseudo-DDs,
green cards that were really green, SYSGENs3 and IPLs4.  Today the
lyrics are more up-to-date.  We no longer sing just about HASP (or
JES2) but about everything from DB2 and Rolm phones, to personal
computers.  In fact, some people say you can get a good sense of the
history of the information processing industry over the last twenty
years just by thumbing through the pages of this song book.  The songs
in this book, those which we actually sing at the session, are popular
melodies taken from such diverse musical areas as Broadway musicals,
Rock, Opera, Country/Western, Top 40, Pop and Folk.  These songs have
"enhanced" lyrics written by SHARE members about their favorite topic:
hardware and software system products.  Everyone at SHARE is invited
to turn a creative hand to producing new songs for our session.  While
there are no restrictions on what tunes can be used, the most
successful offerings are those melodies instantly recognized by most
people and that are very "singable".  Of course "singable" is a
relative term.  Lyrics should be topical, about software and hardware
systems, and should fit the meter and phrasing of the song.  Lyrics
should be in good taste.  Profanity and libel are unacceptable and
proper names (especially last names) are discouraged.  Humor, puns,
jokes, and onomatopoeia are strongly encouraged but difficult to
achieve (and harder to spell).  Prizes, peer acclaim and a place in
this book await the authors and songs judged best at each SHARE
meeting.

Submitting Songs

Song submissions are accepted starting Monday of SHARE week and may be
delivered to the Esprit de Corps mailbox in SHARE Headquarters anytime
during the normal hours of that office.  All submissions must be
delivered by 12:00 Noon on Wednesday of SHARE week.  The last pickup
from the mailbox will be made at 12:30PM on Wednesday afternoon.
Songs received after that will be held over to the next SHARE meeting.
Song submissions may also be delivered directly to the Session
Speaker, the JES2 Project Manager, or a JES2 Project Deputy.

Preference for Electronically Submitted Lyrics

Preference will be given to song lyrics that are submitted in machine
readable format, on appropriate media, and in suitable format
(described below).  Song  lyrics that are submitted on paper
(including punch cards, cocktail napkins, and the like) will be
considered for use only if time to prepare them for display is
available.  Paper submissions that are not used at the current SHARE
meeting may be converted to machine readable format and held over to
the next SHARE meeting.

Media

Submissions will be accepted only 3.5" HDD diskettes.  The diskette
should be labeled as shown below and must include a title line
specifying the SHARE meeting date with the words "Song Submission" and
at least your name and installation code.

SHARE Song Submission 02/22/1998
(6 Songs from 4 authors)

John Doe (IWC)
International Widget Corporation
123 Sesame Street
Mid Town, MA 02135

Information Processing Center
Mail Point 3-N-90A

Content

Each diskette may contain as many song submissions as you wish and
these submissions need not all be from the same author(s) or
installation.  Each song submission must be a separate PC DOS ASCII
text file.  Songs formatted according to the rules described below are
preferable, though any song submitted as a DOS ASCII text file will be
considered in machine readable format.  Regardless of the format of
your submission, to be eligible each song file must contain at least:

* A title, source, or other information that identifies
  the melody being used. If the song is unusual or likely to be
  unfamiliar to the organizers of the sing-along you must attach sheet
  music to your submission. (Please observe relevant copyright and
  royalty laws when copying sheet music.

* The names and installation codes of the authors of the "enhanced"
  song lyrics.  Anonymous submissions are permitted but should be
  designated as such in lieu of supplying an author's name.

Conventions and Notation

When typing your song lyrics there are some conventions you should
observe to help make your song suitable to be displayed and sung.
This notation helps people know how you intend the lyrics of the song
to be sung in relation to the melody.  Mostly, normal punctuation and
spelling is used.  Each verse of the song is written as a series of
lines similar to the lines of a poem.

Emphasis, Expansion, and Contraction

Sometimes a longer word in the new lyrics for a song are is used to
replace several shorter words in the original lyrics.  When this is
done the meter and phrasing of the song may require that some or all
of the syllables in a word be emphasized or sung individually.  In
these cases the individual parts of a word to be sung are set off with
hyphens.  For example, if "in-tu-it-ively" were written then each
hyphenated section of the word would be sung separately.  Contractions
are indicated with apostrophes.  Apostrophes can be used anywhere in a
word, even before the first letter to drop syllables that are not
sung.  For example, "Because" is often contracted as "'Cause"
(pronounced "kuz").  Contractions are also common at the end of words
such as "workin'" (working) or "SHAREin'" (SHAREing).  Sometimes a
syllable in a word should be held across several notes.  Holding can
be used when your wording has fewer syllables than required by the
songs phrasing, but this should be avoided when possible.  Held
syllables are usually indicated using hyphens and/or repeated letters
or ellipses at the end of a line.  For example, "AaaaBEND..." is held
long at the end of a song, or "paging" might be sung with an elongated
"a" sound.

Pronunciation, Spelled Words and Numbers

When words are spelled out in capital letters separated by hyphens,
the spelling of the word is sung.  For example, "S-C-A-T" would be
sung as "es-cee-a-tee".

If a word is capitalized but not hyphenated, such as "SYSGEN" or
"APAR" then the conventional pronunciation used in data processing
parlance will be sung.  In this case "sis-jen" and "ay-par".

If an alternate or unconventional pronunciation is desired or if a
word is uncommon then specific singing instructions may be included as
a parenthetical remark in the song text.  For example: CICS (say
kicks).

In most cases numbers in songs are sung according to the same
convention as capitalized words.  For example, 360 would likely be
sung as "three-sixty".  Where it is not clear how a number should be
sung or to make certain that a number is sung as required it is better
to spell out the pronunciation.  For example, "ninety-six-seventy-two"
instead of 9672.

Song Tag Language

In the past, overhead transparencies were also produced from DCF
Script input files.  More recently, a set of display programs that
drive a video graphics projector has been used as the SHARE Esprit de
Corps session.  These methods depend on a special set of SCRIPT tags
designed specifically to format songs.  While it is not required, if
you wish, you may "mark up" your song submissions with these tags to
assist us in preparing your song for display.  The tags are defined as
DCF (SCRIPT) macros and operated like normal DCF tags.  Some tags,
like SONG, VERSE, CHORUS and REPEAT are used to delineate parts of the
song.  For printing or display they control appropriate formatting and
pagination.  Other tags, like SONG, BY and KEY are used to format
indexes and the table of contents in the printed song book and to
create catalogs for the song display programs.  Some tags that permit
character string operands such as titles require that the parameter
strings be enclosed in single quotation marks if the string contains
blanks and/or if more than one string parameter is present.  For
example:

.SONG 'My Country Tis of Thee' 'God Save The Queen'

If a character string operand contains a single quotation mark (or
apostrophe) then each single quotation mark is entered as two adjacent
single  quotation marks.  For example:

.SONG 'There''s No Business Like Show Business'

SONG


.SONG 'title' ['subtitle']

The SONG tag is used to begin a song and specify the title of the song
and optional subtitle.  The information on the SONG tag in your file
should be the original title of the song (if you know it) or something
that will give people a clue as to what melody you intend the lyrics
to fit.  The optional subtitle can be used to specify an alternate
name for the song or further information that will help identify the
song's melody such as:

.SONG 'Suicide is Painless' 'M*A*S*H TV Theme'

.SONG 'If I Only Had a Brain' 'from the Wizard of OZ'

The SONG tag is used to indicate the title at the top of a song in the
song book or at the top of the screen on the display.  Any optional
subtitle will appear in italics after the main title.  The SONG tag is
also used to create index and table of contents entries in the song
book and catalog entries used by the song display program.  There
should only be one SONG tag in any DOS ASCII text file that you
submit.

BY


.BY author-information

The BY tag is used to include the names and installation codes of song
authors in the song file.  BY tags are used only in producing internal
catalogs and statistics.  Authors names are not included in the song
book or displayed by the song display programs.  You may include as
many BY tags in song files as there are authors of your "enhanced"
lyrics.  The author-information specified may be anything and need not
be enclosed in quotation marks.  You should include at least the
authors first and last names and their SHARE installation code.  If
your song submission is to remain anonymous then you should include a
BY tag with the string "ANONYMOUS" in place of the author's name.

VERSE


.VERSE <'optional title for medleys'>

The VERSE tag is used to delineate the verses of a song.  Each verse
of the song, including the first, should be preceded by a VERSE tag.
In addition to beginning each verse, a title may be used in a medley
where the melody of each verse may be different.  The VERSE tag is
used to control pagination and scrolling in the song book and display
program respectively.  When the optional title is specified in a
medley verse the optional title is included as a title on the printed
or displayed verse.

CHORUS


.CHORUS

The CHORUS tag is used either to store a repeating chorus verse or to
repeat a previously stored chorus verse.  When the same wording is
used over and over again in the song as a chorus the CHORUS tag should
be used.  However, if each chorus of the song is sung with slightly
(or greatly) different wording then the choruses are treated as normal
verses and the VERSE tag must be used.

The first time the CHORUS tag is encountered all the song lines
following the tag up to the next CHORUS or VERSE tag are saved.  Then,
every time a CHORUS tag is encountered the saved chorus is
automatically inserted in the displayed song.

For example, in the song "It's A Small, Small, World (No. 1)" printed
below, the chorus beginning "It's a HASP world after all..." would
appear after each verse since a CHORUS tag appears after each verse.
Note also, that the CHORUS tag before and after (and terminates) the
saved text of the chorus is necessary to make the chorus appear after
the first verse.

.SONG 'It''s A Small, Small World (No. 1)'

.VERSE
It's a world of paging, a world of swaps,
It's a world of staging and multidrops,
Though I'm running JES-2 on my new C-P-U,
It's a HASP world after all.
.CHORUS
It's a HASP world after all,
It's a HASP world after all,
It's a HASP world after all,
It's a new HASP world.
.CHORUS
.VERSE
We can SHARE our SPOOLs,
We can fill our queues,
On our U-P, A-P, and M-P-Us,
Although I-B-M says
that its new name is JES,
It's a HASP world after all.
.CHORUS
.VERSE
To improve response and remove distress,
JES-2 runs the show under M-V-S.
Though it's now called JES-2,
It's a HASP world after all.
.CHORUS
REPEAT


.REPEAT

The REPEAT tag is used in very short songs to cause the entire song to
be sung a second time.  In the song book the notation "(REPEAT)" is
printed at the bottom of the song.  The display program recognizes the
REPEAT tag and scrolls the display of the song a second time with an
appropriate comment.  The REPEAT should always be the last tag in any
song to be repeated.


  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Songs

Song 001 Amazing Grace
Amazing V-S! How I have found.
It wrecks a person's mind.
I once was found, but now am lost;
Could see, but now am blind.

V-S has taught my core to page,
And page my core it did.
How precious little I have done
Since I have I-P-Led.

Through many dangers, toils, and snares,
I have already come.
'tis HASP hath brought me safe thus far,
JES-2 will lead me home.

When I have run ten thousand jobs,
Each running as it should,
'till then I'll wait to praise V-S,
And say that it is good.

Song 002 The Battle Hymn of the Republic (No. 1)
Thine boss has seen the glory of the coming of the JES.
It is routing out the SYSPRINT where the datasets are stored.
It displays the lightning of his speedy R-J-E support.
HASP-5 is marching on!
chorus
Glory, Glory, HASPellujah,
Glory, Glory, HASP-'ill-do-ya,
Glory, Glory, HASPellujah,
HASP-5 is marching on!

A-A-A-Bend.....

Song 003 Auld Lang Syne (No. 1)
Should old Chuck Forney be forgot,
And HASP songs sung no more?
We'd shed a tear that times have changed,
And ask, what's now in store?

We'll hang our orange ties up now,
And padlock all our HASPs,
And bid our friends a fond adieu,
With one last hearty clasp.

We'll miss you Jim, and John, and Tod,
And Bob, and Bill, and Joe,
'cause stalwart workers like you all
Have made our project go.

We had our jokes on all you folks,
The one we did the best
Was when we said that HASP was dead;
We thought it was in JESt.

We gave you HASP-three-oh to try,
Complete with overlay,
But V-S had to come along,
and HASP had had its day.

When HASP commenced to be JES-2,
Some loyalists did stray.
They bid us all a fond adieu,
And went their merry way.

So JES-2 came and HASP went out;
It would never be the same.
JES-2-slash-HASP is really fast,
But what a cruddy name.

We're moving on to better things.
We know you'll not care much.
We'll always treasure all our friends.
We hope you'll keep in touch.

Song 004 Bicycle Built for Two (No. 1)
HASP team, HASP team, give us your answer true,
We're half-frantic at the lack of a shared HASP queue.
We might seem a bit myopic,
But ASP would be catastrophic.
It would be great, to communicate
With a HASP System built for two.

Users, users, what can we say to you?
We're just dying, to give you a little clue.
We might say it's under study,
but we'll level with you buddy.
We must concede, we've seen the need
for a virtual HASP for two.

Song 005 California, Here I Come (No. 1)
Real good throughput, here I come;
Not quite where I started from.
For HASP is, The Program
That makes it all go.
And O-S, When barefoot,
Does everything slow.

P-I-D, please don't be late;
That's cause I can hardly wait
To prove that HASP will be so great;
Real good throughput, here I come.

Song 006 Blowin' In The Wind
How many jobs must a HASP user run
Before his reader drains dry?
And, How many buffers must HASP be given
Before the printers will fly?
Yes, and how many lines must Ma Bell put in
Before HASP need even try?
Chorus
The answer, my friend, is blowin' in the wind.
The answer is blowin' in the wind.

How many gens must a HASP man do
Before they call him a man?
How many mods must one man make
Before Simpson makes it his plan?
How many REP's will it take 'till he learns
That O-S should be forever bounded?
Chorus

How many years can HASP exist
Before it replaces O-S?
How many times can we tell it again
That HASP is clearly the best?
Install it today and you, too, will say
That it's faster by far than the rest.
Chorus
Without it, my friend, you're blowin' in the wind.
Without it you're blowin' in the wind.

Song 007 Heigh Ho, Heigh Ho
I/O, I/O, it's SPOOL-to-disk we go.
The throughput's great, no need to wait,
I/O, I/O, I/O

I/O, I/O, it's SPOOL-to-disk we go.
JES-2 will do your input queue,
I/O, I/O.
repeat

Song 008 Bye Bye Love
Chorus
Bye Bye HASP, Bye Bye HASPiness;
Hello MVS; Think I'm gonna cry.
Bye Bye HASP; Bye Bye sweet O-S;
Hello M-V-S; I feel like I could die;
Bye Bye my HASP, goodbye.

There goes my C-P-U7, With something new.
It sure runs crappy, I sure am blue.
HASP was my baby, 'Till JES stepped in.
Goodbye performance, That might have been.
chorus

I'm through with O-S, I'm through with HASP.
I'm through expectin', Jobs to run fast.
And here's the reason, That I'm so peeved.
My loving HASP, Is through with me.
chorus

There goes my HASP code, It's what I knew.
V-S's a mystery, And so's JES-2.
I was so happy, And now I'm blue.
My boss just told me, We're on JES-2.
chorus

Song 009 The Christmas Song (Chestnuts Roasting on the Open Fire)
Users waiting at a C-R-T8.
Phones are ringing off the hook.
The M-T-O displays futility,
And calls the D-B-A9 to take a look.

Everybody knows, the input's in the message queue,
And madly hits keys, one by one.
It only takes an hour or two
For I-M-S10 to say that it is done.

They know that D-B-A will say
That the respo-onse time is really A-O-K.
And as they curse the C-P-U,
They find that their transaction finally has gone through.

And, so we're offering this simple phrase,
For users from here to personnel.
Although it's been said many times, many ways,
Our response time's gone to hell!!!!!

Song 010 California, Here I Come (No. 2)
H-A-S-P so long now,
J-E-S-2 take a bow.
A tower of power, Join in the Fun.
Each Morning, at dawning,
Printers sing and everything.

And, we are singing of its traits.
That's why we can hardly wait.
No-ow, let's make that golden date,
J-E-S-2 here we come.

Song 011 The Daring Young Man On The Flying Trapeze (No. 1)
Once I was happy but now I'm forlorn,
For I am a 140111 that's been scorned.
I'm left in this world to fret and to mourn,
Replaced by a 37012.

Oh, the shop where I was, it was dreadful,
But I tried all I could, there to please.
But the system they brought in to supercede me
Was once known as H-A-S-P.
chorus
It runs through their jobs with the greatest of ease.
The subsystem once known as H-A-S-P.
Its schedules are graceful, the management's pleased,
And my work it has taken away.

This JES-2 is known as a hard working guy.
Users would look up to it with a sigh.
The programmers saw it and told me 'Goodbye,'
Their hearts flew to it like a breeze.

So I knew that my lifetime was over.
I was there when it picked up my load.
They just plugged it right in and then shouted 'let's go,'
I was packed up and sent down the road.
chorus

Song 012 HASP Medley (No. 1)
verse (Happy Days Are Here Again)
HASPy days are here again,
Fixed core is at an all time min,
To run without it is a sin,
HASPy days are here again.
verse (Poor Judd Is Dead)
O-S is dead, Plain O-S is dead,
There it lies, the console all serene.
It wasn't doing well, And it finally rang the bell.
It was just another good old 'Fox-Oh-Three13.'
verse (Happy Days Are Here Again)
HASPy days are here again,
Fixed core is at an all time min,
Now that all the gens are coming in,
HASPy days are here again.
verse (Ain't She Sweet)
Ain't HASP neat,
See it really can't be beat.
Now I ask you very confidentially,
Ain't HASP neat.

Ain't HASP nice,
Look it over once or twice.
Now I ask you very confidentially,
Ain't HASP nice.

Just cast an eye, In its direction.
Oh-me-oh-my, Ain't it perfection.

I repeat
HASP has got the others beat.
So I ask you very confidentially,
Ain't HASP neat.
verse (Happy Days Are Here Again)
HASPy days are here again,
Fixed core is at an all time min,
Rapid R-J-E can now begin,
HASPy days are here again.
verse (The Best Things In Life Are Free)
HASP belongs to everyone,
The best things in life are free.
The tasks are active, every one;
They're working for you and me.
The SYS-INs and OUTs, the pseudo D-Ds,
The R-J-E specs; all made to please,
HASP now belongs to everyone,
Maybe O-S should be TYPE-III14.
verse (Happy Days Are Here Again')
The next release should be the one,
It's half as big and twice the fun,
Will HASP-III come soon or be too late,
We'll just have to dollar wait, wait, wait.

Song 013 Home On the Range (No. 1)
Oh, give me a JES that will do what I says,
And control my one-sixty-eights, three.
For one which I heard
Has a three-byte half-word
And uses a real C-T-C15.

JES, JES, my JES3,
Whose setup does something to me.
The performance, I've heard 's
A discouraging word,
But, it still lets you run R-J-E.
repeat

Song 014 Look What They've Done To My Song
Look what they've done to your HASP, Tom.
Look what they've done to your HASP.
It's the only thing I-B-M did right.
And now they've let it lapse, Tom.
Look what they've done to your HASP.

Look what they've done to your name, HASP.
Look what they've done to your name.
You're called JES-2 and they say you're new,
But it's such a funny name, HASP.
Look what they've done to your name.

Wish I could find JES sup-por-t.
Wish I could find good support.
Well, if I could reach a real HASP guy,
I'd never have to sit down and try.
To write an APAR report.

Song 015 I Write The Songs
I wrote the HASP that made old O-S run.
I wrote the HASP that made mod writing fun.
I wrote the HASP that R-J-E begun.
I wrote the HASP, I wrote the HASP.

I wrote the HASP that let the whole world SPOOL.
I wrote the HASP that's now the system man's tool.
I wrote the HASP that keeps programmers cool.
I wrote the HASP, I wrote the HASP.

I wrote the HASP with ideas new and bold.
I wrote the HASP which gave you true job control.
I wrote the HASP which lets you reach your goal.
I wrote the HASP, I wrote the HASP.

I wrote the HASP that joy and light did bring.
I wrote the HASP that simply does everything.
I wrote the HASP of which good people sing.
I wrote the HASP, I wrote the HASP.

I wrote the HASP that broke the bottleneck.
I wrote the HASP that finally JES-2 did wreck.
I wrote the HASP that's great, but what the heck.
I wrote the HASP, I wrote the HASP.

Song 016     It's A Small, Small World (No. 1)
It's a world of paging, a world of swaps,
It's a world of staging and multidrops,
Though I'm running JES-2 on my new C-P-U,
It's a HASP world after all.
chorus
It's a HASP world after all,
It's a HASP world after all,
It's a HASP world after all,
It's a new HASP world.

We can SHARE our SPOOLs, We can fill our queues,
On our U-P16, A-P17, and M-P-Us,
Although I-B-M says that its new name is JES,
It's a HASP world after all.
chorus

To improve response and remove distress,
JES-2 runs the show under M-V-S18.
Though it's now called JES-2,There's no need to feel blue,
It's a HASP world after all.
chorus

Song 017 Let It Be
When I find myself in times of trouble
Then my F-E19 comes to me,
Speaking words of wisdom:  J-Q-E20.

And in my hour of darkness
He is standing right in front of me,
Speaking words of wisdom:  J-C-T21.
chorus
S-R-B22; D-C-B23; T-C-B24; A-C-B;
Whisper words of wisdom:  I-O-T25.

And when the broken hearted coders
Working on V-S agree,
There will be an answer:  M-V-T.

For, although HASP has parted
There is still a chance that they will see,
There will be an answer:  M-V-T.
chorus
U-C-B26; I-O-B27; D-E-B28; C-V-T29;
There will be an answer:  M-V-T.

And when my mind is clouded
There is still a light that shines for me,
Wait until tomorrow:  M-V-T.

We come up to the sound of crashes
Then my F-E comes to me,
Speaking words of wisdom:  M-V-T.
chorus

Song 018 Mame
You coax the speed right out of the box...HASP.
You charm my boss right out of his socks...HASP.
You get the printers strummin' and drummin' out a tune to beat O-S.
The R-J-E is hummin', since MULTI-LEAVING came it is the best.

You make the system easy to trick...HASP.
With local mods that really are slick...HASP.
You make the old O-S Reader shrivel at the mention of your name.
You've made O-S alive again,
You've made O-S survive again,
The old Type-III has won again...HASP.

You bring the users back with a smile...HASP.
They don't have to wait a long while ...HASP.
You took the hassle out of running under O-S M-V-T,
You put more speed into the printers and the punch and R-J-E.

You take our C-P-U and its bits...HASP.
And make our jobs run fast with your blitz...HASP.
You came, you saw, you conquered and absolutely nothing is the same.
Your special fascination'll prove to be inspirational,
We think your just sensational...HASP.

You have been changed to run V-S-2...HASP.
We want you part of anything new...HASP.
You cut our I-P-L in half; cut the time we need for restarting;
You handle all our unit rec; O-S doesn't ever see a thing.

We want to give you all out support...HASP.
We'd give you 'A' on any report...HASP.
You have commands so all we need from OZ is one for cancelling;
You give us hooks for all we ask;
You rearrange the queue of tasks;
You're just the most sensational...HASP.

Song 019  My Country Tis of Thee (No. 1) (God Save The Queen)
My salesman sold to me
A thirty-thirty-three with sixteen megs,
A three-seven-oh-five, Four hundred new disk drives,
Se-le-ec-to-or channels five, Sti-ll sixteen regs.

Also a newer one, a thirty-eighty-one, model group 'K'.
It has channels galore, And twice as much main store,
And weird new louvered doors, It works O-K ?

And now he sold one more, a thirty-eighty-four,
four way M-P30.
Four run as fast as hell, Or so the SE's tell.
But far as I can smell, Four runs like three.

And now he sold one more, Vectors, expanded store
and E-S-A,
A new six-hundred 'S' faster I/O... and Yes!
A larger price you'd guess, We had to pay.

And then he sold to me, A sys-tem three ninety,
with ES-CON LAN
Fi-ber un-der the tiles, Channels that run for miles,
And mem-o-ree stacked up in piles
He's a happy man.

One more he had to sell, C-MOS and para-lell
and air-cooled too
Mem'ry, four hundred megs, No M-P bottlenecks
Ten thousand trans per sec, It's supposed to do

We now run M-V-S, V-TAM, C-I-C-S,
and S-N-A.
They barely run the thing, Software of which I sing
Spends all of its time pa-aging
Fro-om C-S-A.

We once ran M-V-T, On our old three-sixty,
and under HASP.
Now with our new JES-3, All that we ever see
Is a-bend 0h-C-3, Go-od save our ASP.

Song 020 MTA (No. 1)
Let me tell you the story of a Type-3 program
That was written not so many years ago.
When O-S had a reader and O-S had a writer,
But we said that they both must go.
They went into a huddle and they came up with an answer,
We have all come to know as HASP.
It printed and it punched and it also tended lines,
While it read cards and all without a gasp.
chorus
Will it ever be dead?  No it will never be dead.
But its fate we must still learn.
HASP won't live forever as a Type-3 program,
But the name will always return.

Now one fine day, the Mother Corporation
Decided to do things right.
When they looked around they found it had been done,
So they took over HASP without a fight.
They packaged it in ribbons when they added one new thing,
And they thought that they were through.
But someone pointed out that it had an old name,
So they went and re-named it JES-2.
chorus

Many are mods that will fall by the wayside,
As we find new bytes to steal.
We'll have to start over with a new set of source code,
Knowing that virtual is not real.
As we reinvent our patches and our neat little routines,
One morning when you're going up the wall.
Remember that JES-2 didn't come out of nowhere.
And that HASP was the saver of us all.
chorus

Song 021 Sidewalks of New York
High bytes, low bytes, all around the store;
There's something wrong with the system;
It's the garbage in low core.
C-V-T and others, blocks and tables galore,
Chained from a single pointer at location ten of core.

Up to eight megs, all of our main store,
Dumping out on the printer and collapsing on the floor.
P-S-Rs and S-Es, have made our manager sore,
Because they can't find the problem, we're not running anymore.

One dark night at thirty-eight past four,
I think I finally have found it, it won't bother us no more.
A pro-o-gram named JES-3, that was permitted to store
Had cleared out all of the data in the first 4-K of core.

Song 022 My Favorite Things
PID tapes and SNA-fu's and half-ASCII graphics,
RAC-F and S-Us and APARs they half-fix,
SYSGENs and down time and rents fit for kings -
These are a few of my least fav'rite things!

'Class C' and hex dumps and programs that A-BEND
I-Q-F-oh-3 to tell you what happened,
Turtles and turkeys, the kind without wings -
These are some more of my least fav'rite things.

Q-TAM and B-TAM and T-CAM and V-TAM,
Q-SAM and V-SAM and flotsam and jetsam,
V equals R and the grief that it brings -
These are still more of my least fav'rite things.

When the heads crash, when the line's dead, when the thing won't add -
I simply remember the SHARE meet ahead and then I don't feel so bad!

But, breaks without coffee and SCIDS without popcorn,
Microphone setups that sound like a foghorn,
House booze at Hiltons and wake-up-call rings -
SHARE has its share of my least fav'rite things.

HASP songs that don't rhyme and buses in traffic,
Head-quarters copies that aren't xer-o-gra-phic,
Speakers that don't show and beds without springs -
These are some more of my least fav'rite things.

Denver in winter, Miami in August,
Pre-registration that takes you the longest,
Thursday night's swans who were Monday's duck-lings -
These are still more of my least fav'rite things.

When the rains pour, when my butt's sore,
when my head's been had -
I simply remember the problems back home, and then I don't feel so bad!

Song 023 Sweet Violets
chorus
SPOOLing with HASP
SPOOLing the input quickly.
Pulling it off for multiple tasks.
Now you can see why we're SPOOLing with HASP.

There once was a system its name we all know.
The folks down in Houston said it ran too/
Morrow when NA-SA needs output today.
If we can't improve it, we'll throw it a/
Tape drive or core box or new C-P-U.
Upgrading the system will get the job/
Over the budget with no time to spare.
'Big Brother' said 'Fix it' and now we are/
chorus

Song 024 Oh What a Beautiful Morning
Oh, the sounds of V-S are like music.
The sounds of V-S are like music.
The sixteen meg dump is on zero-one-five,
And it looks like it reaches clear up to the sky.
chorus
Oh, what a beautiful lemon.
Oh, what a virtual bomb.
I have that sneaky suspicion,
Everything's really gone wrong.

Oh, the C-Es are standing like statues.
The C-Es are standing like statues.
Our support is the best, from the pick of the team,
But the O-L-T programs won't fix our machine.
chorus

There's a bright golden haze on the channel.
There's a bright golden haze on the channel.
The paging device is an F-H-S-D,
And the system works well...A new 650 'V'.
chorus

Oh the system is thrashing HOS reader.
The system is thrashing HOS reader.
The wait light is off on our two-ninety-five.
The thrashhold's been passed... but HASP's still alive.
chorus

Song 025 Praise God From Whom All Blessings Flow
Praise cash, from which all blessings flow.
Praise more income and less outgo.
Praise bucks above the Heavenly Host.
And praise the bottom line the most.

Praise T-S-O and I-M-S.
IN-QUIRE and C-I-C-S.
There's SYS-EXEC and T-CAM, too.
We need another C-P-U.

Our software is just like a nose;
Sometimes it runs; sometimes it blows;
And now our system barely limps.
It's modified by many whimps.

Equipment comes; equipment goes.
Our hardware's also like a nose.
Another I-O gen - - good luck.
Here comes another vendor's truck.

An ABEND dump is so much fun.
That's why we're always printing one.
A stand-alone is better still.
I wish I owned a paper mill.

I guess that things will never change.
If I don't leave, I'll get deranged.
There comes a time to leave or stay.
Where can I send my resume?

Song 026 Rubber Ducky
Mul-ti Ac-cess, you're the one,You make SPOOLing so much fun.
Mul-ti Ac-cess, our manage-ment's Fond of you, ... ... ... ...
(S-S-O-Bs)
Mul-ti Ac-cess, joy of joys, JES-2 systems it employs.
Mul-ti Ac-cess, you're a programmer's friend it's true.

OH -
Every day SYSOUT -
Makes its way through the JES-SPOOL -
We find the printer's flying, the -
SPOOLs are frying our output, -
(Support-in' seven systems)

Mul-ti Ac-cess, you're so fine,
Now that 'Crabby' has made you mine.
Mul-ti Ac-cess, we're awfully fond of you.

Mul-ti Ac-cess, you're the one,
You make SPOOLing so much fun.
Mul-ti Ac-cess, our manage-ment's
Fond of you, ... ... ... ...

Mul-ti Ac-cess, we're awfully fond of -
Even-though, it doesn't speak R-TAM,
Mul-ti Ac-cess, we're awfully fond of you.

Song 027 Seventy-Six Trombones
76 remotes led into the main.
With 110 consoles (M-C-S):
They're for typing the rows and rows of the finest W-T-Os
That come from HASP and all the rest.

76 remotes read the input in
From 110 readers right behind.
They submitted a thousand decks
Without ill effects,
There were runs of every shape and kind.

There were number-crunching packages in FORTRAN H;
Dundering, blundering thru I's and J's and K's.
COBOL compilations and some object decks,
Object decks set up in overlays.

There were fifty mounted tape drives in the I-O room,
Sortering, mergering, faster than before.
Catalogues of every size,
And schedulers who'd supervise,
A full work load always in the core.

76 remotes took a print checkpoint,
With 110 more forms in the queue.
And with the printers set,
You can surely bet
That old HASP will know which ones to do.

76 remotes punched their output out,
And the accounting cards, stacker three.
And fin'lly a track map merge
By the one and only purge,
As it put back, put back, put back tracks;
Put back - till all the tracks were free.

Song 028 Take Me Out To The Ball Game
Take me out to the SHARE meet.
Let me go down to SCIDS.
So I can sing the old 'HASPenpoof song.'
Let me write some HASP res-o-lu-tions;
When they accept it's so neat.
For it's two, three, four times a year
At the old SHARE meet.
repeat

Song 029 The Wiffenpoof Song
From the ballroom of the Waldorf,
To the Queen Elizabeth bar,
To the Frisco Hilton Inn we love so well,
Stand the HASPers now assembled,
With their glasses held on high,
And the magic of their system casts its spell.

Yes, the magic of their system,
Of the things it does so well,
Of the thruput gained, and all the local mods;
We will serenade our program,
And the authors and the rest,
And we'll so be running with the new V-S.

For it's poor O-S, that has gone astray,
Baa, Baa, Baa,
But HASP came along to save the day,
Baa, Baa, Baa.

Type-one SPOOLing, not for me;
Damned from here to Po-Kip-See.
Lord have mercy on S-D-D,
Baa, Baa, Baa.

Song 030 There Is A Tavern in The Town
There is a tavern in the town (in the town)
And there my F-E sits him down (sits him down)
And drinks his wine mid laughter free
And never, never speaks to me.
chorus
Fare thee well, for you must leave me,
Do not let the parting grieve thee,
For remember that the best of friends must part, must part.
JES-2, JES-2, I run JES-2 (run JES-2)
I never had a need for you (need for you)
I ran HASP-3 under O-S M-V-T,
And now run JES-2 virtually.

He left me for a system frail (system frail)
Each Friday night it used to fail (used to fail)
And the week's production keeps his weekend full.
He says his job is never dull.
chorus

Oh! Dig his grave both wide and deep (wide and deep)
Put A-PARs at his head and feet (head and feet)
And on his breast put a P-T-F or three,
To show he died of A-S-P.
chorus

Song 031 Those Were The Days (No. 1)
Once upon a time there was a system
Which read and SPOOLed and ran the printers too.
Remember how we coded up the changes,
And dreamed of all the great things we could do.
chorus
That was the HASP my friend, There's no use to pretend,
We sang and danced, then coded the night away.
We'd make the mods we choose.
We'd fight and never lose,
For we had HASP, and it would lead the way,
La-la la-la-a ... ... ... La-la la-la-a ... ... ...
We had the HASP, and it would lead the way.

Then the busy years went rushing by us,
HASP went through version two to version three.
The features and enhancements kept on coming,
From execution batch to R-J-E.
chorus

Soon the days of V-S were upon us,
The future roll of HASP was now in doubt.
But, version four of HASP was soon to follow,
And show what virtual SPOOLing's all about.
chorus

Yet today there looms another system,
It's more complex and difficult to grasp.
We look at M-V-S and ask the question,
Is that JES-2 system really HASP?
chorus
It's really HASP, my friend, There's no use to pretend.
We sing and dance, then gen the night away.
We'll make the mods we choose,
We'll fight and never lose,
For we have HASP, and it will lead the way.
La-la la-la-a ... ... ... La-la la-la-a ... ... ...
For we have HASP, and it will lead the way.

Song 032 Those Were The Days (No. 2)
Once upon a time there was a system
Where we used to run a job or two.
Remember how we moded 'way the hours
So JES-2'd do the things we wanted to.
chorus
JES-3's the way my friend, our search is at an end.
We'll SPOOL and print forever and a day.
We'll run the way we choose, hot start and never lose,
For we were wise to pick the JES-3 way!

When the busy years went rustling by us,
We lost our starry notions on the way.
JES-3 put in the greatly needed functions.
We looked at one another and we'd say.
chorus

Last year we put JES-3 in our new system.
Setup and GLOBAL ENQUEUE was for me.
In the glass I saw a strange reflection,
Was that happy person really me?
chorus

Across the floor I hear a funny rumble.
I see the crowd and hear them call that name.
Oh, my friends the world has finally found it,
And in our hearts JES-3 will e're remain.
chorus

Song 033 Waltzing Matilda
Once a jolly HASP-man came to a SHARE-meet,
So proud of his mods to the HASP TWO POINT THREE,
And he sang as he watched and he waited for the session start,
'You're all gonna run the great HASP in my way.
chorus
Run the great HASP, run the great HASP,
You're all gonna run the great HASP in my way.'
And he sang as he watched and he waited for the session start,
'You're all gonna run the great HASP in my way.'

Up came Tom Simpson announcing with his mighty voice.
'There is a new HASP THREE POINT OH,'
And he laughed as he told them that 'all your mods are obsolete,
Cause you're gonna run the great HASP in my way.
chorus
Run the great HASP, run the great HASP,
You're all gonna run the great HASP in my way.'
And he laughed as he told them that 'all your mods are obsolete,
Cause you're gonna run the great HASP in my way.'

Up jumped the HASP-man when he heard the facts and cried,
'You've done it all and left nothing for me.'
With a sigh and a cussword he sat down and he hung his head,
'We're all gonna run the great HASP in your way.
chorus
Run the great HASP, run the great HASP,
We're all gonna run the great HASP in your way.'
With a sigh and a cussword he sat down and he hung his head,
'We all gonna run the great HASP in your way.'

Song 034 The Yellow Rose of Texas
'Twas a system down in Houston, In trouble, plain to see.
Its hardware was not running, Could no one set it free?
And then they vowed to save it, Some men of Houston fame.
The goal was versatility, And HASP the program name.
chorus
She's the sweetest piece o' software
That Houston ever knew.
Her code is fast as lightning; Her errors are so few.
You may talk about your V-S-2, And sing of A-S-P,
But the HASP they wrote in Houston is the only one for me.

HASP requires so few attendants, Her system is unique.
She purrs and runs so smoothly, She has no nasty streak.
You'll marvel at precision, You'll wonder at her speed,
And if you try her program now, You'll find you're in the lead.
chorus

Song 035 Windmills of Your Mind
After SCIDS with too much liquor and a meal with too much food,
After singing all the HASP songs in a virtual good mood,
In your stupor do you stumble and then fall into your bed
With the food and drink and songs and lights, still reeling in your head?
Do you dream they all are gathered and that things are less than fine?
Line inserted by the judges - fixes meter - sorta rhymes.
And they I-P-L your mind
For yet another time.

After wading through your JOBQUE and then opening your lines.
The $-S is issued and you restart several times.
The new work comes in swiftly and is stacked around the door,
An operator fumbles disk pack rolls across the floor,
The supervisor curses and calls him a 'bumbling fool'
Line inserted by the judges to maintain the meter rule.
Do you always lose your cool
When they saturate your SPOOL?

As your working set increases and your page faults come in throngs
With devices all assigned and queues getting way too long
Your channels can't steal cycles and your GETMAINs can't get core
When you A-BEND all your tasks it makes your operators sore.
Rest and peace elude you and you feel that it is still a crime
Line inserted by the judges yet for still another time.
As they I-P-L your mind, for the 47th time.

So they retrain you to M-V-S and implant J-E-S
First by cutting out SYSJOBQUE and then rippin' out your HASP.
Are there rumors now of doubling your capacity of core
And replacement of your mainframe when they shove you out the door.
Do you feel the junk yard beckon as you stand upon the brink?
Line inserted by the judges as we sit around and drink.
Does this ever make you think, at SCIDS you should not drink.

Song 036 Yesterday (No. 1)
Yesterday, It was then I heard my F-E say,
That D-S-S would go away.
Oh, I believe in yesterday.

Suddenly, Debugging's harder than it used to be;
Field Engineering got to me
For D-S-S went suddenly.

Why'd it have to go,
I don't know, They wouldn't say.
They've done something wrong.
Now I long for yesterday.

Yesterday, Debugging was a game I'd play.
Now if M-V-S will go away.
Then I'll go back to yesterday.
Then I'll go back to yesterday.

Song 037 Yellow Submarine
In the town where SHARE is held
People come to SCIDS and chat,
And they talk and liquor flows, as they talk of disk and DAT:
'Which HASP version do you run, in your single C-P-U?'
'Two-point-three, and three-point-one,
Four and five, and ninety-two ---'
chorus
We all run in a virtual machine,
A virtual machine, a virtual machine.
We all run in a virtual machine,
A virtual machine, a virtual machine.

For our operating staff, Straight V-M was hard to grasp,
So we took a week and wrote
HASP-to-HASP-to-HASP-to-HASP.
chorus

And it's virtually clean;
JES-2 bugs -- all else is cool;
It will not accept replies,
And a warmstart kills the SPOOL.
chorus

Song 038 America The Beautiful (No. 1)
Oh beautiful for spacious SPOOLs;
For network job entry.
For HASP commands with operands;
That support R-J-E.
For buffer pools and shared JES SPOOLs;
And straight E-X-C-P,
For code that's fast and built to last;
In spite of S-M-P.

There's NUC, PAR-POO, and X-E-Q; and HASP-I-N-I-T,
Account and COMM, reader and CON; and HASP-M-I-S-C.
There's RATs and CATs and MICE and NATs;
and even D-D-Ts,
Source code C-SECTs and block D-SECTs;
we customers can see.

We once were glad, when HASP we had;
on O-S M-V-T.
We now have JES on M-V-S;
e-ven though it's not free.
We've made our choice and with clear voice;
We sing it now for thee,
JES-2 is best, beats all the rest;
It's better than JES-3.

Song 039 Bicycle Built for Two (No. 2)
HASP-ers, HASP-ers; what are we gonna do?
I-B-M says that HASP is nearly through.
I don't need a HI-PO flowchart
To see there's no HASP support.
But we can run; and still have fun
On a HASP that is called JES-2.

JES-2, JES-2; what do you think of that?
M-V-S, too; all else is just 'old hat.'
They both really go together,
Just like 'birds of a feather.'
So we will run; and still have fun
On a HASP that is called JES-2.

Song 040 America The Beautiful (No. 2)
Oh HASP system, so great and strong, For all the SPOOLs you run,
For standing out to last so long, Since version number one.
You're called JES-2, it's sad but true,
You're still the same to me.
From starting out in Hu-oo-ston,
You've made such history.

When HASP was HASP, and OZ was real, we loved you as type three,
And when V-S caught our appeal, we loved you, virtually.
You've made it through from option two to M-V-S/S-E.
The world knows now, we'll stay by you,
Till they close S-D-D.

When JES-2 was announced we cried,
And mourned the mods we lost.
Then promised ne'er to stray from them no matter what the cost.
Then I-B-M heard us, my friend, and finally saw the light.
They put the features in again to make the future bright.

Yes, HASP system, your faithful code made V-S JES' so clean.
And multi-access let it run, on more than one machine.
Our team has won, and it's such fun
To finally see the sun.
You've passed the test, you're still the best
At long last it's type one.

The new release is N-J-E (we called it HASP-to-HASP).
Though now it links JES-2 with HASP, V-M and even ASP.
Oh, N-J-E, you're good to see, but one thing puzzles me.
If all those systems talk to you,
What happened to JES-3?

Oh, HASP system our faith in you we proudly do proclaim.
As N-J-E routes data sets from San Jose to Maine.
By any name you're still the same, and we will sing your fame.
We'll look for you in micro-code
In u-r next main frame.

Song 041 Joy To The World
JES-2's the word - no more disgrace
We've finally dumped JES-3.
Let every system pro-grammer, re-allocate his data-sets
On thirty-three-fifty, On thirty-three-fifty,
On thirty, on thir-ir-ty, three-ee fifty.

HASP ruled the world for many years
And overlays ran free.
ASP crashed and filled us all-l-l,
With ever growing fearfulness
Ab-end-ing frequently,
Ab-end-ing frequently,
Ab-end-ing, ab-end-ing frequently.

JES-3 was 'sposed to save us all
But then came N-J-E.
It saved our installation, from sheer disintegration
Why can't it JES't be free?
Why can't it JES't be free?
Why-y can't it, why can-an't it JES't be free?

Song 042 Plop, Plop, Fiz, Fiz
Patch, patch, Fix, fix, Oh, what a release it is.
Patch, patch, Fix, fix, Oh, what a release it is.
Oh-h-h-h, What a release,
What a release, it is!

Song 043 I Am The Very Model Of A Modern Major General
I am the very model of a modern systems analyst,
I come to SHARE and list'n to some lectures from the published list,
I work by day and then at night I go to SCIDS to get refreshed,
And learn from others whom I meet regarding sessions I have missed.

I learn of supervisors from an I-B-M executive,
And how my tasks go thru my box, concurrent not consecutive.
I learn of access methods and of hardware and of SPOOLing,
And at all of these different goodies I am positively drooling.

My system runs on M-V-S and JES and V-TAM/A-C-F.
I have a user network which I really think is big enough,
But my users want to grow and asked me to increase its size,
So I've stayed with I-B-M instead of with the other guys.

The penalty I pay for this is clear and plain for all to see,
I-B-M has well and truly got its claws and hooks in me.
There'll never be a chance for me again to be an onlooker,
In fact I think that I-B-M's the biggest, bestest hooker!!!

Song 044 Lucille
In a shop in Poughkeepsie; they code J-E-S-3
In a manner that boggles the mind.
They say it is better; if you read the blue letter,
But my boss is the questioning kind.

He had asked me to GEN it; so we could condemn it,
When they asked to provide a JES-3,
When asked by opinion; I only could tell him
The best way to run is N-J-E.

When they said we could test run; JES-2 would be the one
That would solve all the problems for us.
So up came release three; of that great N-J-E,
But it crashed and blew up with a cuss.

You picked a fine time to ab-end JES-2,
Four thousand job queue and month-end overdue,
Print queues o'erflowing; must you be going ?
This time you picked K-O-2
You picked a fine time to abend JES-2.

Song 045 The Alphabet Song
E-X-C-P, wait, post, ex-it,
Getmain, freemain, link, X-C-T-L.
Load, delete, and reg-main too,
Time, synch, a-bend, just to name a few.
Now I know my S-V-C's,
All the way through zero-dee.
repeat

Song 046 Mickey Mouse Club
There's a system in our land that's made for you and me,
P-C-P, M-F-T, good old M-V-T.
O-HO-S, O-HO-YES,
Forever let us hold our paddle high... high, high, high!
Come along and sing our song, And gen up two one eight.
P-C-P, M-F-T, good old M-V-T.

There's a system in our land that's made for them and us,
S-V-S, V-S-1, good old M-V-S.
V-EE-S, O-HO-YES,
Forever let us hold our turkey high...high, high, high!
Come along and sing our song, And gen-up three eight 'C'.
S-V-S, V-S-1, good old M-V-S.

Who's the vendor in our land, that's made by you and me ?
I-B-M, I-B-M, good old I-B-M.
I-B-M (Mickey Mouse!)
I-B-M (Mickey Mouse!)
Forever let us hold our symbols high...high, high, high!
Come along and sing our song, And fight for more support,
Here at old, here at old, S-H-A-R-E.
Here at old, here at old, S-H-A-R-E.

Song 047 Four Leaf Clover
We think it's nifty, our thirty-eight fifty,
With cartridges, disks, and more!
It's real expensive, with storage galore.
It's so extensive, it takes up a floor.
No files we're staging, no files we're aging.
That's not what we got it for.
We won't deny it, we had to buy it,
To out-do the shop next door.
repeat
Song 048 Jingle Bells
chorus
J-C-L, J-C-L, it leads me astray,
It's no fun when all my jobs begin then go away.
J-C-L, J-C-L, making backlog light;
No one's jobs are ever run 'cause no one gets it right.

Flashing through the queues, right into cla-ass "A"
Hoping it will go, instead it goes away.
Change the J-C-L (I've been here all night)
I watch the jobs become "jobfail"
Why can't I get it right?
chorus

Song 049 My Bonnie Lies Over The Ocean (No. 1)
My job is stuck out on the HASP "Q"
It's somewhere in output class "C"
And five thousand pages of output
Are sitting there waiting for me.
Chorus
Please print, please print,
Oh, please print my listing for me, for me.
Please print, please print,
Before I am too old to see.

The printers have quite a large backlog
Of thousands of small jobs (that's right!)
But, my job's been sitting there waiting
A week, as of last Thursday night.
Chorus

Song 050 Ever Onward, IBM
There's a thrill in store for all for we're about to toast
The corporation that we represent.
We're here to cheer each pioneer and also proudly boast,
Of that man of men our sterling president
The name of T.J. Watson means a courage none can stem
And we feel honored to be here to toast the I-B-M.

Ever onward! Ever onward!
That's the spirit that has brought us fame.
We're big but bigger we will be.
We can't fail for all can see, that serve humanity
Has been our aim.
Our products now are known in every zone.
Our reputation sparkles like a gem.
We've fought our way through
And new fields we're sure to conquer, too.
For the ever onward I-B-M!

Ever onward! Ever onward!
We're bound for the top to never fall,
Right here and now we thankfully
Pledge sincerest loyalty
To the corporation that's the best of all.
Our leaders we revere and while we're here,
Let's show the world just what we think of them!
So let us sing men - sing men
Once or twice, then sing again
For the ever onward I-B-M

Song 051 Sweet Georgia Brown
When you I-P-L your system, if you are down,
You should think of what you're running
(Might make you frown).
If you find that you've not got the best in the town,
Your users will cry;
I tell you no lie; Here's why:
chorus
JES-2 runs and we-all love it (that's nothing new),
JES-3 users look with envy; their choice they rue.
Users, love it so.
It makes systems go.
Users named it and proclaimed it:
Sweet HASP/JES-2.

JES-2 is the one that should be run in your shop;
Put it on and you will find that it will not stop.
Giving you the kind of system that will not stop.
Your users will say:
You're earning your pay, (Hoo-Ray!)
chorus

Once upon a time the system now called JES-2
Was called HASP and ran on O-S, S-V-S too.
Then with M-V-S it was changed and turned into:
A virtual dream;
The cream of the cream;
We've seen.
chorus

Song 052 Stout-hearted Men
Give us a HASP
Oh, a super-new HASP
That will give snazzy goodies, galore.

Start out with O-S
And improve it be-cause
It works better than ever before.

Re-write the Writer
and read-in the Reader.
And overlay saving much core.

Then you'll find it's
Better far than GASP, or LASP, or ASP.
That's because it is
The super-new type V-3 HASP.

Song 053 Goodnight Irene
chorus
O-S goodnight, goodnight,
O-S goodnight,
Goodnight O-S, goodnight O-S,
We'll see you virtually.

One night when we were sitting
In front of our one-sixty-five
An I-B-M rep came to us
To tell us V-M had arrived.
chorus

He told us that our new model
Was stuck with release twenty-one
And our old faithful HASP system
Wouldn't be in V-S-1.
chorus

The new V-S-1 is boosted
By something called J-E-S
All of our re-mote terminals
are handle by R-E-S.
chorus

Our HASP is only supported
In the new V-S-2.
Only big M-V-T users
Can still continue to.
chorus

Our future with O-S is virtual;
That I-B-M has contrived.
We must not let that prevent us.
From planning to survive.
chorus

So sadly O-S we leave you
We part thee with a tear
But little we know what's in store
From I-B-M next year.

Song 054 I've Been Working on the Railroad
I've been working on the HASP mods,
All the (clock time) day.
I've been working on the HASP mods,
Just to make the system pay.

Don't ya see the system churnin'?  I hope it don't go 'way.
Don't you see the SYSOUT burnin'?
I hope it doesn't STAE.

O-S don't you know, O-S don't you know
You won't have your way-ay-ay.
If this doesn't blow, If this doesn't blow
PAR-POO's gonna be O-K.

Somethin' is a'hurtin' in R-TAM,
Somethin' is a'hurtin' I say-ay-ay-ay.
Somethin' is a'hurtin' in R-TAM,
Must of lost an overlay.

I've been working on the HASP mods
All the (clock time) day.
I've been working on the HASP mods
Just to make the system pay.

Don't ya see the system churnin'?
I hope it don't go 'way.
Don't you see the SYSOUT burnin'?
I hope it doesn't STAE.

Song 055 Home On the Range (No. 2)
Oh, give me a HASP
Where the programming's fast
And the lines and the terminals work;
Where seldom is heard
A discouraging word
And the big system bugs never lurk.
chorus
HASP, HASP, in our shop,
Where the lines and the terminal work;
Where seldom is heard
A discouraging word
And the big system bugs never lurk.

Song 056 Down by the Old Mill Stream
Down by the old job stream,
Where I first met you;
With your HASP so new,
Gened with overlay, too.
It was then I knew
That I needed you, too.
You were modified
To I-B-M's pride;
Down by the old job stream.

Song 057 Clementine
chorus
Oh, my system, Oh, my system,
Oh, my system, so serene.
You will always run so smoothly with the great five-one-fourteen.

One OZ reader, No OZ writers
And the system runs so clean.
HASP has come to save my system,
And it now runs oh, so keen.
chorus

Many C-SECTs, And assemblies,
Make it ever less as mean,
As it was before the version;
'Tis the best I've ever seen.
chorus

Queue the SYSOUT, batch the students,
Age the jobs, and watch them run;
Run so well we don't believe it;
For us HASP is number one.
chorus

Song 058 HASP Medley (No. 2)
verse (Hey Jude)
Hey HASP you are so fast,
You take a good thing, and make it better.
Remember to let HASP into your core,
And you can be sure
You won't regret it.
verse (When Irish Eyes are Smiling)
When S-D-D was happy,
All the world thought they were best,
But when other vendors came to us
It put them to the test.

They thought that they were best of all,
But now they're not so sure.
Well, if HASP should ever be Type-one
The business would be secure.
verse (Song of the Volga Boatmen)
Oh, S-D-D
If truth be told
HASP should be Type-one
Before we grow old.

Song 059 You Are My Sunshine
You are my system, My only system.
You make me HASPy, with R-J-E.
You'll never know HASP,
How much my throughput
Improved when MULTI-LEAVING
Came to me.

You drive my printers, you drive my readers.
They go so fast, I just can't see.
You'll never know HASP, how much we suffered.
'Til we shot and laid to rest our old S-E.

Song 060 Yessir, That's My Baby
HASP-two that's my system;
O-S writers, never missed 'em.
HASP-two that's my system now.

Oh, by the way; By the way;
HASP ups performance every way.

HASP-two that's my system;
O-S writers, never missed 'em.
HASP-two that's my system now.

Song 061 Tea for Two
Oh baby, picture you upon my knee,
We've just gened HASP-two, version three;
It's faster than the old, old HASP could be.
It takes less core, and it does more,
It will optionally monitor M-F-T,
It's super-new, and it does more for you.
It implements the System/3,
As a remote for R-J-E,
and also saving with the 2770.

The writer from O-S is gone,
the S-M-F, it won't be wrong;
It also has improved command facility.
The special forms are now just fine,
And all the jobs will advance in time;
With aging they just move up in the line.
We have been a family
Of happy users (we're Type-III);
Tell me again how great it's going to be.

Song 062 Hello Dolly
You're great HASP, Really great HASP,
It's so nice to have you on O-S for us.
Your running swell HASP,
We can tell HASP
You are glowing, You are crowing,
In our users' minds.
We feel the room sway-in',
For the core savings,
And the lack of system crashes we have had.
So,...take a bow HASP,
You deserve loud ap-plause, HASP.
You're the best thing that ever happened to us.

Song 063 Exodus
This code is mine
Tom gave this code to me.
It's HASP, first mod to version three.
Though HASP may have some flaws
It's twice as good as OZ,
And without it we would have no R-J-E.

Our cards HASP reads;
Printers and punch it feeds;
Commands are written for all deeds.
Though HASP may be V-Sed.
Upgrades will all be blessed
There is nothing else
we'll use for all our needs.
Or insert in all our creeds
We want B-A-L
As source for all they give or sell.
HASP has passed all tests;
HASP is the best.

Song 064 Big D
You're the big J, I mean you
By the way you can and the way you do
You're the big J, little E, and an S and 2.
And that spells JES-2.
My darling, doing JES-2
Don't it give you pleasure to come thru?
'cause you're the big J, and it's true
You're the big J, little E, and an S and
big J, little E, and an S and
big J, little E, and an S and 2.

Song 065 Whoop-de-do Polka
JES-Y-2, JES-Y-2.
Give you my system and my troubles are through.
JES-Y-2 no-ot 3.
Your kind of spooling is like Heaven to me.
JES-Y-2, JES-Y-2.
Your thruput's higher than a kite.
Hand me down my microfiche,
I am gonna get my wish
JES-Y-2-in' it tonight.

When there's a log-on coming in from T-S-O,
I get a thrill, I always will.
Where there's an R-J-E line stretching out for miles,
I always smile, cause that's my style.
And when you fiddle in the middle of your gen
You tune so sweet, yes, you tune so sweet
that I could die.
Get me into core and let me do some more,
'cause I'm a JES-Y-2-in' kind of guy.

Song 066 Ghost Riders in the Sky
A programmer was writing up some lengthy new ASP code,
By using P-L-S which was the only thing he knowed.
When all at once a blinding flash of lights came into view-
A structured program bug within his 10-meg C-P-U.
chorus
SPOOLing I-O, SPOOLing I-O-----
HASP has the best I-O.

His listings were discolored with red pencil marks and coke.
He seemed to be experiencing a breakdown or stroke
His P-L-M was worthless t'was not even worth a dime.
He rearranged his program for the 7-millionth time.
chorus

As they swivel-chaired on by him, he heard one call to HASP.
If you're going to save your soul from hell don't ever program ASP.
Then finish all your write-ups and clearly mark your decks.
Or you'll have to write the devil's code with ever-changing spec's.
chorus

Song 067 Far Above Cayuga's Waters
Far below the HASP-5 coders, with the B-A-L,
Stand a bunch of I-B-Mers, P-L-S their pal.
chorus
Lift the chorus, speed it onward,
Loud our praises tell.
Hail to thee, the HASP-5 coders.
They use B-A-L.

In a building in Poughkeepsie with their heads held low,
Stand a bunch or I-B-Mers, P-L-S runs slow.
chorus

At a console in that building, see the ABENDs STAE.
There's a group of I-B-Mers, they'll use HASP someday.

Song 068 I Got Rhythm
I got JES-2, I got V-S,
I got M-P,
Who could ask for anything more.

I got dump tapes,, I got print tapes,
I got problems who could ask for anything less.

My old F-E, I can't find
He has gone off to Brazil

Wish that I were back on 20,
With old HASP-3,
Who could ask for anything more.
Who could ask for anything more.

Song 069 Jesus Loves Me
JES-2 loves me, this I know
For Tom Simpson made it so.
Little systems it will run
Better than JES number one.
chorus
Yes, JES-2 loves me.
Yes, JES-2 loves me.
Yes, JES-2 loves me.
Tom Simpson made it so.

JES-2 loves me; I have tried
To couple systems far and wide.
Now I know I'll be home and free.
'twill run better than JES-3.
chorus

Song 070 Old MacDonald Had a Farm (No. 1)
Old McUser had an OZ, E-I-E-I-O
And with this OZ he had a HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
chorus
With a HASP-HASP here,
With a HASP-HASP there,
Here a HASP, there a HASP,
Everywhere a HASP-HASP.

Old McUser had an OZ, E-I-E-I-O.

N-I-H had HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
And with this mod hooked C-P-Us, E-I-E-I-O.
chorus

N-I-H had HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.

T-U-C had HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
And with this mod hooked remote sites, E-I-E-I-O.
chorus

T-U-C had HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.

Deere and Com-pa-ny had both, E-I-E-I-O.
And with these mods hooked everything, E-I-E-I-O.
chorus

N-I-H had HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
T-U-C had HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
Deere and Com-pa-ny had both, E-I-E-I-O.

SHARE proposed a HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
And I-B-M re-jected it, E-I-E-I-O.

With a NO-NO, here
And a NO-NO there,
Here a NO, there a NO,
Everywhere a NO-NO!
Old McUser had and OZ, E-I-E-I-O.
N-I-H had HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
T-U-C had HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
Deere and Com-pa-ny had both, E-I-E-I-O.
SHARE proposed a HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.

I-B-M announced V-S, E-I-E-I-O.
And with V-S there comes JES-2, E-I-E-I-O.
With a JES-JES here,
And a JES-JES there,
Here a JES,
There a JES,
Everywhere a JES-JES.
Old McUser had and OZ, E-I-E-I-O.
N-I-H had HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
T-U-C had HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
Deere and Com-pa-ny had both, E-I-E-I-O.
SHARE proposed a HASP-to-HASP, E-I-E-I-O.
I-B-M announced V-S, E-I-E-I-O.
Old McUser had an OZ, E--I--E--I--O.

Song 071 Side By Side (No. 1)
M-V-S just isn't our system.
We've seen two releases and missed them.
But we SPOOL our SYSOUTs
Using RELAYs and ROUTEs -
HASP to HASP.

With all kinds of work stations,
HASP can support them all.
We send jobs across the nation
Where, doesn't matter at all.

So we won't have to worry or borrow,
If JES-3 isn't ready tomorrow.
We know we'll get along,
Singing our song
HASP to HASP.

Song 072 It's A Small, Small World (No. 2)
There's a story old, and it's oft' been told,
How the simple way often saves the day.
It's because HASP is small and it's function is tall,
It's a tall, small world.
chorus
It's a tall world after all,
It's a small world after all,
It's a tall world after all,
It's a small world after all.

There is work to do on the old job queue
Tho' the schedule's late, still we have to wait.
What is there to be done?
Can the battle be won?
Where's that tall, small world ?
chorus

Well the battle's won, and we're now type 1.
Tho' they call us JES, here's what Simpson sez;
It's because we are small that our function is tall,
It is now a tall, small, world.
chorus

On top we sit; do we now just quit?
Will we ever get our proposed HASP net ?
There's more work to be done, will we run in the SUN?
Where's that tall, small, world ?
chorus

Song 073 Has Anybody Seen My Gal?
Users fight, A two-megabyte
One-five-eight, a minimum site.
Can anybody run JES-2?

S-R-M, P-L-M
M-F-1 and H-A-M
Can anybody run JES-2?

Oh, it will take some core,
And then some more
To run Release 2.
Don't hesitate
The lead time's great
What is the poor user to do ?

Song 074 If I Had a Hammer (No. 1)
If I had a HASP,
I'd be SPOOLin' in the morning,
I'd be SPOOLin' in the evening,
All over this land.
I'd SPOOL all the SYSIN,
I'd SPOOL all the SYSOUT,
I'd SPOOL the jobs between the remotes and the local
Aaa-aahh, all over this land.

If I had some 370's,
I'd join them in the morning
I'd join them in the evening,
all over this land.
I'd join all the input;
I'd join all the output,
I'd join all the jobs for every C-P-U,
Aaa-aahh, all over this land.

If I had V-S, I'd load it in the morning
I'd load it the evening,
all over this land.
I'd load in the super;
I'd load in the link pack,
I'd load in the SPOOLing system called HASP.
Aaa-aahh, all over this land.

Well, I've got my HASP, and I've got my hardware,
And I've got my network to form,
all over this land.
It's a network with HASP;
 it's a network with V-S,
It's network with SPOOLing between remote HASPs.
Aaa-aahh, all over this land.

Song 075 Joy To the World
HASP was a great subsystem.
Under O-S it was pure and true.
So when I-B-M created the world of V-S
It had to be called JES-2,
That is Job-Entry-Subsystem-Two.
chorus
Singing joy to JES-2
The choice for V-S-2,
Joy to its users and the C-P-U
Joy to me and you.

If I were king of the world
Tell you what I'd do
I'd throw away ASP, HASP, and O-S too
And let everyone run JES-2
And their problems would be few.
chorus

So if you're having problems
With jobs filling up your queue
Just install a virtual system
and a DAT black box
And top it off with J-E-S-2 !
'Cause nothing else will do.
chorus

Song 076 It's Been A Long, Long Time (No. 1)
Oh - NAK me once, then NAK me twice,
Then NAK me once again.
It's been a long time-out.

Haven't heard an ACK or NAK,
Since can't remember when.
It's been a long time-out.

You'll never know how long
my read has been un-ending.
At this point even SYNs won't be offending.

So - ACKs and NAKs may break our backs,
But STX will never tax.
It's been a long time-out.

Song 077 It's Been A Long, Long Time (No. 2)
Read me now, convert me now,
And run me once again.
I was on the wrong C-P-U last time.

Swap me once, Swap me twice,
And swap me once again.
I've used my S-R-M time.

Run me on the other C-P-U
Pull me off your multi-access queue.

Oh, route me here, and route me there
And route me anywhere.
Who has a need for ASP !

Song 078 Mary Had a Little Lamb
Crabby had a super HASP,
Super HASP, Super HASP,
Crabby had a super HASP,
Now he's back.

First it went to Gaithersburg
Gaithersburg, Gaithersburg
First it went to Gaithersburg
Now he's back.

Then it went to S-D-D
S-D-D, S-D-D,
Then it went to S-D-D
Now he's back.

Then our maintenance went to Hell
Went to Hell, Went to Hell,
Then our maintenance went to Hell
Now he's back.

Crabby had a super HASP,
Super HASP, Super HASP,
Crabby had a super HASP,
We're glad he's back.

Song 079 Let The Sun Shine Out
We submit, jobs for the nodes in the net,
Running through MULTILEAVING readers,
Using common carrier,
Facilities provided
by none other than Ma Bell,
Scanning for a job to SPOOL
by our remote HASP systems.

Somewhere, inside of I-B-M
there's a mod for HASP,
Who knows when they will release it to us:
My shops depend on T-P daily for production.

SUN will do everything for me adequately,
everything, everything,
I come to SHARE
looking for help in networking
Release of SUN is imperative,
Respond to it ac-cepted, ac-cepted.

Let the SUN shine out
let the SUN shine out,
the SUN shine out.
repeat 4 times

Song 080 Hi Lilly
A song of HASP is the song we sing.
Hi SPOOLie, hi SPOOLie, I-O.
JES-2 for you, what a change will bring.
You ask me how I know?

With two C-P-Us on a common SPOOL,
The throughput will really go.
The system may ne-e-ver crash again.
Hi SPOOLie, hi SPOOLie, I-O.
The system may ne-e-ver crash again.
Hi SPOOLie, hi SPOOLie, I-O.

Song 081 Lemon Tree
When I began as programmer, my leader said to me
Come here and take a lesson.
Life's easy with HASP-3.
No need for real devices, they're pseudo now you see
I know you like to print and punch,
It's easy with HASP-3.
chorus
HASP-3 very simple, HASP-4 is more complex.
Job entry is the answer for us to save our necks.
HASP-3 very simple, HASP-4 is more complex.
Job entry is the answer for us to save our necks.

From M-V-T to S-V-S, in keeping with the rest
If HASP-3 was so wonderful, HASP-4 must be the best.
It used a virtual address space,
to drive a pseudo reader
Paging itself in and out,
it's unreal now to test.
chorus

My com-pa-ny today attempts to bring up M-V-S.
It runs all right, but not without the services of JES.
Each task gets 16 meg-a-bytes, to do its calc-u-la-tion.
The dumps of all this vir-tu-al, creates a re-al mess.
chorus

JES-Y days are here at last.
Old HASP is buried in the past.
Shar-ed SPOOL may get you off you ASP.
JES-Y days are here at last.

Song 082 Will The Circle Be Unbroken
I was standing by the console, on one cold and cloudy day,
When my S-E came to tell me, they were taking HASP away.
chorus
Will the HASP mods go unwritten, in V-S Lord, in V-S
There's a better SPOOL awaiting, in V-S Lord, in V-S

As release day approached my S-E told me clear,
That ASP failed delivery and so our new JES-2 is near.
chorus

It was HASP that saved O-S, and it'll save V-S too,
And now we have in M-V-S, our HASP version JES-2.
chorus

Song 083 Twelve Days of Christmas

SONG      TITLE 'TWELVE DAYS OF CHRISTMAS'
          MACRO
          TWELVE
          LCLA  &VERSE
>NEXTV    AIF   (&VERSE GT 11).END
          EJECT
          SPACE 10
&VERSE    SETA  &VERSE+1
 DC 0C'         On the &SYSLIST(&VERSE) day of V-S,'
*               My salesman sold to me:
          AIF   (&VERSE LE 11).NV12
*                    Twelve stagers staging,
>NV12     AIF   (&VERSE LE 10).NV11
*                    'Leven disks a seeking,
>NV11     AIF   (&VERSE LE 9).NV10
*                    Ten tapes a-turning,
>NV10     AIF   (&VERSE LE 8).NV9
*                    Nine remotes reading,
>NV9      AIF   (&VERSE LE 7).NV8
*                    Eight megs a-realing,
>NV8      AIF   (&VERSE LE 6).NV7
*                    Seven SPOOLs a-sharing
>NV7      AIF   (&VERSE LE 5).NV6
*                    Six channels chaining,
>NV6      AIF   (&VERSE LE 4).NV5
*                    F-H-S-Ds;
>NV5      AIF   (&VERSE LE 3).NV4
*                    Four N-C-Ps,
>NV4      AIF   (&VERSE LE 2).NV3
          AIF   (&VERSE LE 4).NV3A
*                    Three JES systems,
>NV3A     AIF   (&VERSE GT 4).NV3
*                    Three new JES systems,
>NV3      AIF   (&VERSE LE 1).NV2
*                    Two C-P-Us,
*               And a DAT feature in a machine.
>NV2      AIF   (&VERSE GT 1).NEXTV
*               A DAT feature in a machine.
          AGO   .NEXTV
>END      MEND
          TWELVE first,second,third,fourth,fifth,sixth,
                 seventh,eighth,ninth,tenth,eleventh,twelfth
          END

Song 084 Twelve Days of Christmas (No. 2)
On the first day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
A DAT feature in a machine.

On the second day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

On the third day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
Three new JES systems, Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

On the fourth day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
Four N-C-Ps, Three new JES systems, Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

On the fifth day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
F-H-S-Ds;
Four N-C-Ps, Three JES systems, Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

On the sixth day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
Six channels chaining,
F-H-S-Ds;
Four N-C-Ps, Three JES systems, Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

On the seventh day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
Seven SPOOLs a-sharing, Six channels chaining,
F-H-S-Ds;
Four N-C-Ps, Three JES systems, Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

On the eighth day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
Eight megs a-realing,
Seven SPOOLs a-sharing, Six channels chaining,
F-H-S-Ds;
Four N-C-Ps, Three JES systems, Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

On the ninth day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
Nine remotes reading, Eight megs a-realing,
Seven SPOOLs a-sharing, Six channels chaining,
F-H-S-Ds;
Four N-C-Ps, Three JES systems, Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

On the tenth day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
Ten tapes a-turning,
Nine remotes reading, Eight megs a-realing,
Seven SPOOLs a-sharing, Six channels chaining,
F-H-S-Ds;
Four N-C-Ps, Three JES systems, Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

On the eleventh day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
'Leven disks a-seeking, Ten tapes a-turning,
Nine remotes reading, Eight megs a-realing,
Seven SPOOLs a-sharing, Six channels chaining,
F-H-S-Ds;
Four N-C-Ps, Three JES systems, Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

On the twelfth day of V-S, my salesman sold to me:
Twelve stagers staging,
'Leven disks a seeking, Ten tapes a-turning,
Nine remotes reading, Eight megs a-realing,
Seven SPOOLs a-sharing, Six channels chaining,
F-H-S-Ds;
Four N-C-Ps, Three JES systems, Two C-P-Us,
And a DAT feature in a machine.

Song 085 The Old Settler's Song
This song that we're singing's a story.
It happened to you and to me.
It started a-round nineteen-sixty, and may last 'til nineteen-ninety-three.

Back then we had many computers, from STRETCH to the fourteen-oh-one,
with so many different instructions, we all could have oodles of fun.

But I-B-M wanted new profits, and a product con-sis-tency.
So they designed System three-sixty as an arch-i-tecture fam-ily.

Three-sixty had many instructions,
that were to remember too hard.
So ol' I-B-M went and printed a multi-page green reference card.
chorus
A multi-page green reference car-aa-ard
A multi-page green reference card
So ol' I-B-M went and printed
A multi-page green reference card.

Then one day about ten years later, a bold blue announcement proclaimed
that we'd soon be buying new systems
Three-Seventy was the new name.

It still had the same old instructions, and some new that we'd never seen.
And just to add to the confusion, the new reference card was not green.

Three-Seventy's Virtual Storage, runs with a DAT box you know.
The trouble is Virtual Storage, also uses a DASD that's slow.

V-S-2 is the new con-trol program.
They promised us it would run fast.
They told us it never runs slower than O-S  P-C-P without HASP.
chorus
Than O-S P-C-P without HA-A-SP.
Than O-S P-C-P without HASP.
They told it never ran slower than
O-S P-C-P without HASP.

Another few years in conversion, from old O-S to new M-V-S.
And now a new Ex-tended version
means one more time 'round with this mess.

Cross Memory is new arch-i-tecture,
that extended addressing at last.
If only I could understand it, and figure out why it's called DAS.

They've added some new I/O features.
The one that they call "channel queue",
can handle concurrent instructions, as long as it's no more than two.

Another great I/O enhancement is titled "resume and suspend".
They use it to write channel programs,
that do paging I/O without "end".
chorus
That do paging I/O without "e-e-nd".
That do paging I/O without "end".
They use it to write channel programs, that do
paging I/O without "end".

Oh, that's not the last of the story.
The ending has yet to be told.
And nobody standin' here singin', can tell what the future may hold.

We're waiting in an-tic-i-pation of an I-B-M letter that's blue.
In this industry seller tells buyer,
what to want and what with it to do.
chorus
What to want and what with it to do-o-oo
What to want and what with it to do
In this industry seller tells buyer, what to
want and what with it to do.

Song 086 God Bless America
Please fix the system code called V-S-2.
Please don't fight it, just write it.
Make it do what we want it to do.
From the paging, to the staging, to the aging old JES-3.
Please write the code we need in Po-keep-sie
Please hear our anguished pleas, Oh D-S-D.

Replace the com-po-nent called T-S-O
Please remove it, and lose it, for the users on-line it's too slow.
From the LOGON to the LOGOFF, to the lousy T-M-P
Please give us C-M-S and EX-EC three
Please give us C-M-S on S-P-3.

Please don't write anymore, in P-L-S
We don't like it, can't write it; the assemblies it gen's are a mess.
From its do groups, to its bad loops, to the structure of the code.
Please write in B-A-L, like days of old.
Please write in B-A-L, like days of old.

God, help the company, called I-B-M.
SHARE and GUIDE 'em.  Don't fight 'em.
They'll see the light, with insight,
He knows when.
From the hardware, to the software, to the firmware we can't see.
Please help that company or please save me.
Please help ol' I-B-M so they'll help me.

Song 087 Ma±ana
My boss said that he understood,
why I would want to wait
A week or two to do the PUT,
but not six months or eight;
He made me do a mass APPLY,
but next month came to me,
and said "the wait was justified.
I now begin to see."
chorus
Ma±ana, ma±ana, ma±ana is soon enough for me !

I once installed a function, with grief it filled my cup;
It had a lot of P-T-F's, inside the keyword SUP.
But Oh my friends and Ah my foes,
guess what it did to me
when it turned out those P-T-F's
should have been in the PRE!
chorus

My system crashed this morning, and would not I-P-L;
I called my friendly P-S-R and he told me "S-O-L !"
That mandatory P-T-F I told you to APPLY
if you run JES-2 or JES-3, your system she will die !
chorus

Song 088 Greensleeves
Oh, I-B-M, you do me wrong
To cast me off discourteously.
For I have SYS-GENned O-S so long
Delighting in your M-V-T.
chorus
O-S was all my joy.
Real O-S on a three-six-oh.
M-V-S is no child's toy.
Now you've reset my mem'ry to zero.

This M-V-S is a nest of snakes.
Of components and modules it has no end.
Oh, S-D-D, won't you give us a break.
And develop some code that's the user's friend.
chorus
O-S was on better terms.
Real O-S I could understand.
M-V-S is a can of worms.
Please let us escape from buzzword-land.

We wonder now what the future may hold.
Our FW-FM (say FWI-FUM)
and L-S-RAD projects are done.
We need a solution that's creative and bold.
Will it come from "Big Blue" or the Rising Sun ?
chorus

Song 089 Let Me Call You Sweetheart
Let me call you FORTRAN, I'm in love with you.
All your new conventions, Oh how good and true.
Character strings and structures
for my pro-gram-ming needs
FORTRAN 77 -- Puts my mind at ease.
repeat

Song 090 Old MacDonald Had a Farm (No. 2)
I-B-M claims to produce, V-I V-I O
Lots more memory can reduce, V-I V-I O
With a track track here, A track track there
Here a track, there a track
Everywhere a track track
Lots more memory can reduce, V-I V-I O

RAC-F says it will protect, V-I V-I O
If OPEN only does RAC-CHECK, V-I V-I O
With a bit flip here, a bit flip there
Here a flip, there a flip, Everywhere a bit flip
Track track here, track track there
Here a track, there a track
Everywhere a track track
RAC-F says it will protect, V-I V-I O

D-F-E-F is a dog, V-I V-I O
I-C-F's the cat-a-log, V-I V-I O
With a recall here and recall there
Here a call, there a call. Everywhere a recall
A bit flip here, a bit flip there
Here a flip, there a flip, Everywhere a bit flip
Track track here, track track there
Here a track, there a track
Everywhere a track track
I-B-M claims to produce, V-I V-I Oooooooo-------------

Song 091 If I Had a Hammer (No. 2)
If I had a problem, I'd A-PAR it the mornin'.
I'd appeal it in the evenin', I'd take it in hand.
I'd get on the call-queue, I'd talk to a le-vel two
They'd have to call all the coders from L.A. to Poughkeepsie
A-a-all over this land.

If I had an ABEND, I'd dump it in the mornin'.
I'd dump it in the evenin', all Vir-tu-al-ly.
I'd dump out V-SAM, JES-2, I-M-S, V-TAM.
I'd dump out each task and all its brothers and its sisters,
A-a-all Vir-tu-ally.

If I had a P-T-F, I'd APPLY it in mornin'.
I'd RESTORE it in the evenin', All with S-M-P.
I'd find it a P-E, I'd scream at my S-E.
They'd send me a patch to zap but just a circumvention.
Not with S-M-P.

Now I got a new fix, I APPLied in the mornin'.
It's FIX TESTed in the evenin', All over this land.
It's a fix I can run with.
And a bug that I'm d-o-ne with.
It's a job that was done between my F-E and the change team,
A-a-nd now all is grand.

Song 092 Bloody Mary is the Girl I Love
V-M S-P's what I want to run.
S-P-2 they say - is lots of fun.
V-M S-P's what I'm gonna run.
Now ain't that too damn bad !
I-B-M wants it in micro code
They want us to have no source to load.
Even if the author was a toad.
That would be too damn bad !

S-E's say we should run M-V-S
If we did we would be in a mess
The I-dea bugs me I must confess
And that's just too damn bad.

Now to New Orleans we've come to meet.
Talk about V-M, we think it's neat.
Users say that it just can't be beat
Now that ain't too damn bad.

Song 093 Nothin' like a Dame
We got lots and lots of disk and a C-P-U or three.
There's an online T-P system that the users think is free.
We got lotsa dandy packages the salesman said were swell.
What ain't we got?  You know damn well.

There are systems on-line that are beautiful, but brother..
There is one particular one that is better every way, shape, and form, than any
chorus
There is nothin' like V-M, Nothin' in the world.
As a system it's a gem, And there's nothin' that's like V-M.

So suppose it ain't O-S, and it has no T-C-B's.
But it's written very cleanly.  And that dog V-S has fleas.
It's a waste of time to worry, over things V-M has not.
Be thankful for, the source it's got.

Early S-P-2 ship dates are what every shop wants to shoot for.
What we want it's no use asking the Science Research Institute for:
chorus

Song 094 Side By Side (No. 2)
Oh, we just had another election.
New folks are givin' direction.
But we'll straggle along, Singing this song,
Side by side.

Oh we've all had our troubles with source code.
But we'll have to reap what we've just sowed.
Just travelin' the road, Readin' our code,
Side by side.

Through all kinds of sessions.
What if the signs should fall ?
Just as long we are meshin', it doesn't matter at all.

Oh we don't know what Ron now has in store.
There may be changes made ga-lore.
But we'll travel the road, SHAREin' our load,
Side by side.

Song 095 The Bowery
Back when we got our first three-sixty
I-B-M told us how great it would be:
One architecture from bottom to top.
Model to model we'd easily hop.
Unlike the systems in days of yore
Maintenance now would not be such a chore,
O-S release one was ordered, and so
We'll never run IBSYS again.
chorus
The systems, the systems.
They do strange things,
in the strangest ways.
The systems, the systems.
We'll run P-C-P evermore.

Then came M-F-T and M-V-T,
Proving how different the pieces could be.
Almost the same but just different enough.
Moving between them could be pretty tough.
Fin-al-ly V-S came out in the sun,
Producing core image dumps by the ton.
S-V-S and V-S-1 they were called.
I'll never run O-S again.
chorus
The systems, the systems.
They do strange things,
in the strangest ways.
The systems, the systems.
We'll run S-V-S evermore.

Pretty quickly S-V-S was dead.
M-V-S gave it a shot to the head.
S-M-P, V-SAM and more of that ilk.
Bother the users and curdle their milk.
V-S control blocks fill all of my core.
Turnaround time makes my customers sore.
So to appease them we'll install V-M,
And never run V-S again.
chorus
The systems, the systems.
They do strange things,
in the strangest ways.
The systems, the systems.
We'll run C-M-S evermore.

Even V-M has its problems, it seems.
S-N-A works, but it's only in dreams.
I-B-M threatens to take source away.
But when they'll do it so far they won't say.
D-D-P now is the latest gee-whiz.
Personal systems are taking my biz.
So now I'll join them with my new P-C,
And run M-S-DOS evermore.
chorus
The systems, the systems.
They do strange things,
in the strangest ways.
The systems, the systems.
We'll run M-S DOS evermore.

Song 096 Those Were The Days (No. 3)
Once upon a PUT tape was an A-PAR,
which gave our users many problems true.
We thought while dialing that eight-hundred number.
The glorious things a P-T-F could do.

Level one could not find any matches,
and waited for a call from level two.
And in that time, we built ourselves some patches,
and searched again the tapes from Waterloo.
chorus
Software service, my friends
The fun it never ends.
With each release: adventure like the rest.
Why is it things you need, your S-E's do not read ?
But then you know that I-B-M's the best.

The F-E said, "It's gotta be the software."
We waded through a ton of dumps in hex.
The P-S-R, dispatched said "No, it's hardware."
Our boss read catalogs that were brand X.

The software service is an awesome creature.
But it comes up, in time, with answers true.
We're told, "It's not a bug. It is a feature.
At cost, you see, there is this R-P-Q."
chorus
Software service, my friends
The fun it never ends.
With each release: adventure like the rest.
Why is it things you need the P-S-Rs don't read ?
But then you know that I-B-M's the best.

There's gotta be a better way to do this?
We needed far more software certainty.
But now the new releases won't  confuse us.
'Cause we found out that SHARE is level three.
chorus
Software service, my friends
The fun it never ends.
With each release: adventure like the rest.
Why is it things you need the market reps don't read ?
But then you know that I-B-M's the best....

Song 097 Yesterday (No. 2)
Yesterday ...That was when I heard my S-E say.
M-V-T had finally gone away.
Oh, I believe in yesterday.

Suddenly ...Things aren't easy like they used to be.
Now I'm stuck with using S-M-P.
Oh, yesterday went suddenly.

Why'd HASP have to go, I don't know they wouldn't say.
It was good so long.  Now I long for yesterday ...

Yesterday ... HASP's definitely the better way,
SUPERZAP was maintenance day-to-day.
Oh, I believe in yesterday,
Mm, m mmmmmmm mm mmmmmmmm.......

Song 098 Take This Job and Shove It
I been workin' on these mods, for neigh on fifteen years.
Now you want to take my source, and leave me in a pool of tears.
An' I've seen a lot of coders work, to make their systems play.
I'd give the shirt right off my back, if I had the guts to say:
chorus
Take my source and keep it.
I don't want it anymore.
C-I-C-S and I-M-S, are all I'm workin' for.
Now I-B-M says, "No more source."
So I'm walkin' out the door.
Take this source and shove it, I don't need it anymore.

Now I-B-M and SHARE discuss our needs for all the source.
M-V-S and V-M curse, C-M-S and JES folks too.
One of these day we're gonna blow our tops
and I-B-M is gonna say,
"We gave you the function, you asked for
so we won't have to say:"
chorus

Song 099 The Policeman's March (Pirates of Penzance)
When the thing won't I-P-L,
Write an A-PAR. Write an A-PAR.
When the system rings the bell,
Write an A-PAR.
When you find the only thing,
Write an A-PAR. Write an A-PAR.
Is to call the branch and sing,
Write an A-PAR.
For when threatened by a crash,
Write an A-PAR. Write an A-PAR.
If the C-V-T is hash,
Write an A-PAR.
There is nothin' makes right, like description black and white,
In an I-B-M A-PAR.

When the phone rings off the hook,
Write an A-PAR, Write an A-PAR.
The message isn't in the book,
Write an A-PAR.
If you think you're in a loop,
Write an A-PAR. Write an A-PAR.
Or performance seems to droop,
Write an A-PAR.
Oh, if your system she is down,
Write an A-PAR, write an A-PAR
Before your boss begins to frown,
Write an A-PAR
There is nothin' gets a fix, nothin' else will do the trick,
like an I-B-M A-PAR.

If you think you need a change,
Write an A-PAR, write an A-PAR.
If your output, looks too strange,
Write an A-PAR.
When the software doesn't work,
Write an A-PAR, Write an A-PAR.
If the P-S-R's a jerk,
Write an A-PAR.
Just to get you off the hook,
Write an A-PAR, write an A-PAR.
So I-B-M will take a look,
Write an A-PAR.
There is nothin' that will do.
Nothin' else will bring you through
like an I-B-M A-PAR.

Song 100 Car 54 Where Are You ?
There's a holdup in the box and the SPOOL is out'a bytes.
There is output in the job queue, that will print for forty nights.
There's a guy whose lost his files, Dumps are stackin' up in piles.

JOB 54 Where Are You ?

Oh ! The network's tied in knots, Links been timin' out all night.
There is somethin' wrong in Boulder, San Jose and Yorktown Heights.
And I've re-started this line, for the sixty-seventh time.

JOB 54 Where are you ?

Now an error in the clocks, and a bunch of bright red lights,
and a card jam in the reader, and a mess at remote sites,
and the user down the aisle, has been screaming for a while:

"JOB 54 Where are you ????"

Song 101 This Land is Your Land
JES-2 is my JES.
It is not your JES.

You run the other.
It's such a mother.
LOCALs and GLOBALs.
Elapsed time doubles.

JES-2 was made for me, not you !

As I was running, my readers reading.
My printers printing, and punches punching.

JES-3 was thrashing, and systems crashing.
JES-2 was made for me, not you !

Song 102 Battle Hymn of the Republic (No. 2)
Mine eyes have seen the gory. and beheld the greatly bored.
They are tearing up the spec sheets where the thought of man is stored.
They do not hail Doctor Dykstra as the stucturalist's Lord.
Their code goes ramblin' on.
chorus
God, it's gory this spaghetti.
For this junk I am not ready.
Unstructured coding is unsteady
and just goes ramblin' on.

I have seen them building bonfires in a hundred gloomy camps.
They claim that structured coding causes them to get hand cramps.
They yearn for days more restful yet they still can KLUDGE like champs.
Their code goes ramblin' on.
chorus

Song 103 Sixteen Tons (No. 1)
Some people say machines are made outta chips,
Digital logic and bi-nary bits.
Takes a technical weirdo to make it all run.
So I went to Computer-Land and bought myself one.
Chorus
Ya load 16 bits, and whattya get?
 64K and a floppy diskette.
At twelve hundred dollars, it is surely insane
You get a biorythm chart and a video game.

I was born one mornin' in a software mine.
I picked up my keyboard and I entered a line.
I've written some BASIC and extended FOR-TRAN
but when I tried to do COBOL, none of it ran.
Chorus
Ya load 16 bits, and whattya get ?
 64K and a floppy diskette.
 I-B-M don't ya call me 'cause I gotta regroup.
 I'm stuck right now in an infinite loop.

Well, I sat at the keyboard
With the programmer's itch,
Everything that I entered ran into a glitch.
I messed up my memory and my register gates.
Made me curse, fold, spindle and mutilate.
Chorus

I got a serial modem and a pair of disk packs.
The house I once owned is now Radio Shack's.
Thirty I/O ports to do as ya will.
If the price don't get ya, the electric bill will.
Chorus

Song 104 I Don't Want No More of Army Life
The sessions at the SHARE meet, they say are mighty fine.
I just got outta two of them that both have blown my mind.

I don't want no more of HASP JES-2,
So boss I'm goin' to SHARE.

I've heard of JES and I-PO, more than I ever cared.
I've learned you can't tune M-V-S
And no one's ever dared.

I can't take no more of M-V-S,
So I am going to SHARE.

M-V-S and S-R-M, they say can run on time.
But I just saw my paging rate
Approach nine-oh-nine.

Oh, I can't handle all the V-I-O,
So I am going to SHARE.

M-V-S with X-A is really quite a hit.
But what the heck does it do with
That thirty-second bit ?

Oh, my machine's too small to run X-A,
So I am going to SHARE.

A-S-M in X-A can page above the line.
But we just swapped out JES-2
And now the SPOOL's offline.

I can't handle more than sixteen megs
and now I wanna go,
Please boss just let me go,
Just let me re-lax at SHARE.

C-M-S and V-M, they say are really great
But C-P swapped out C-M-S
The system's now in wait.

Oh, I need S-E help with C-M-S,
So I am going to SHARE.

Were using V-M/S-P-3, it's running really well.
We have no user memory.
Response time's gone to hell.

Oh, I can't deal with V-M/S-P-3,
So I am going to SHARE.

On I-B-M Po'keepsie's new thirty-ninety-three,
Ten billion bytes of memory
Still pages virtually,

Oh, I can't handle any new machines,
So have gone off to SHARE.

My just completed week at SHARE has been a pleasant stay.
I learned a lot of useful things
I hope will make it pay.

I can't drink no more at SCIDS tonight,
Gee boss, I wanna go,
Please boss, just let me go,
Gee now I wanna go home.

Song 105 Boney Fingers (MVS is Breaking My Heart)
If it IPLs then JES won't start,
And if it gets up then it falls apart.
MVS is breaking my heart !
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.
chorus
Work your fingers to the bone and what do you get ? ......
Boney fingers ....  Boney Fingers ......

The S-R-M is a turkey in disguise,
And MF/1 is telling me: start a job and the whole thing dies.
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.

The memories won't communicate, and A-S-M simply doesn't relate,
Swapping seems to be controlled by fate.
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.
chorus

The control block structure is really a mess
Who designed it Armonk won't confess
Inbreeding and incest is our best guess, but
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.

There still exists a C-V-T, but it lost out to the A-S-C-B,
And where the hell is my T-C-B?
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.

Address spaces are all the rage, my T-C-B must be out in a page,
We think the architect's kept in a cage!
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.

I can't get dispatched, without a doubt,
The S-R-M's in charge of the rout,
And he's got the A-P-G swapped out!
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.
chorus

Once upon a time, there was a JES2,
Another definition is, you really get screwed.
When JES3 comes, it will do it to you, but
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.

JES2's there and they say it works,
No JES3 but they claim it lurks.
We suspect JES5 will be written by Turks.
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.

T-S-O is another big mess,
The system gets more and the user gets less.
Let's replace the sucker with TSS!
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.
chorus

With S-M-P they fumbled the ball, and P-L-S means taking a fall.
The system staff is climbing the wall.
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.

PDS's are really good files, but P-I-D has developed new styles:
The system now is shipped in piles.
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.
chorus

Our salesman tells us that it's all a breeze,
the conversion's done with the greatest of ease,
Our development doesn't even have to freeze, well
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.

But he doesn't mention, with his usual tact,
The round heels we never seem to lack
'Cause he gets 4K to keep us on our backs.
Maybe things will get a little better in the morning,
Maybe things will get a little better.
chorus

Someday maybe they will do it right, but not without a hell of a fight,
Can we ever get them to see the light ?
Maybe things will get a little better in the future,
Maybe things will get a little better.

Whether Q or FS the result's the same:
Getting screwed will still be the name of the game.
And we all know where to lay the blame, but
Maybe things will get a little better in the future,
Maybe things will get a little better.

To obtain our input is their current ambition,
so we offer this critique of our own volition
Couldn't IBM learn a new position?
Maybe things will get a little better in the future,
Maybe things will get a little better.
chorus

Song 106 The Mickey Mouse Club Theme
Whose the leader of the SHARE, that's made for you and me?
chorus
B-U-T  T-E-R  F-I-E-L-D
Butterfield           (Mickey Mouse)
Butterfield           (Donald Duck)

Forever let us wear our badges high, high, high, hi!

Come along and sing our songs
Just cause it's Thursday night
chorus

Don't ever let the bar at SCIDS run dry,
Oh my! So

Now its time to say goodbye to all our company

B-U-T     (Tea?! Is SCIDS closing?)
T-E-R     (Are you sure the bar stays open 'til 1 tonight?)
F-I-E-L-DEEE

Song 107 The Happy Wanderer
I love to go a-wandering, through all the JES-2 code
To see if I can change this thing, to do it in my mode.

J-Q-E    J-O-T
J-O-E    I-O-T-EE-EE-EE  EE-EE
H-C-T    C-M-B
Control blocks ev'ry-where.

Then IBM came to a SHARE and told us not to fuss
They'd fix that bug in MVS, and shipped it with no source.

C-A-T    A-C-T
P-C-E    D-C-T-EE-EE-EE  EE-EE
E-R-A    I-C-E
Control blocks ev'ry-where.

About that source, I did not care, for I still had my JES
To modify to my content and add to tapes at SHARE.

O-C-R    K-I-T
M-I-T    N-I-T-EE-EE-EE  EE-EE
N-C-C    O-C-T
Control blocks ev'ry-where.

Then once again, they came to us with a new kind of trick
To beat the good old Rising Sun, they came up with restrict.

P-I-T    R-A-T
R-D-T    Q-S-E-EE-EE-EE  EE-EE
S-J-B    N-H-D
Control blocks ev'ry-where.

Now JES-2 still does have its source, for that I still am glad
But I can't share my mods of course, and now I am so sad.

T-G-B    T-E-D
T-R-P    T-Q-E-EE-EE-EE  EE-EE
S-V-T    X-I-T
Control blocks ev'ry-where.

Song 108 Military Hymn Medley
verse (Air Force)
Here we go, Running a brand new system
Watch it blow, High as the sky.
P-T-F's, Somehow it seems we missed 'em
Now I feel, That I could cry.
New PUT tapes, Don't do a thing to help us
They just make everything worse.
We work all night. to set things right
Hey! Nothing can stop the V-M/SHARE Corps!
verse (Anchors Aweigh)
SYSGEN, away, my friends
SYSGEN, away
Farewell to restful nights
We work 'til break of day-ay-ay-ay

Fixes from Level 2, help make it run
So, 'til SHARE meets again
We're hoping that we've got the battle won!
verse (Marine Corps)
From the hallowed halls of Endicott, to the shores of San Jose
We will fight for source code main-ten-ance, 'Til its guaranteed one day
First to fix the bugs from P-I-D. then to add some functions more
If they try to take our source away
Then they'll hear the users roar!
verse (When the Caissons Go Rolling Along)
Here at SCIDS, Thursday nights (everybody high as kites)
You'll hear HASPers keep singing along
Lots of puns, lousy rhymes, We encounter many times
As the HASPers keep singing along.

Though a high, high "C", means a cracked-up note or three
HASPers keep singing HASPy songs
For where SHARE may go, you will always know
That the HASPers keep singing along!

Song 109 Suicide Is Painless
Through early morning's fog I see
System dumps a-waiting me
It ABEND-ed at half past three
I'll fix it now with S-M-P.

But S-M-P ain't painless, it brings on many changes
It can be used with or with-out the "E".

I called up Level One to-day. to try to fix the o-ver-lay
They said that I would have to pray
That help would come a-nother way.

See, Level One ain't painless, they often appear brainless
They only queue you up to Level Two.

Level Two then rang my phone, but what they said caused me to moan
They left me standing there alone
"We cannot fix what we don't own".

Though Level Two ain't painless, it's sometimes even gainless
You can't re-port the problem on your own.

I did a search through INFO-SYS
Keyword searches - Oh what bliss
Fifty - fifty, hit or miss
Twelve thousand P-T-F's to list.

But INFO isn't painless
When it displays the changes
But sometimes it's the only friend you have.

In INFO-SYS I found a zap, I worried that it might be crap
I can't be sure that it will map
And Level Two won't take the rap.

But SUPERZAP ain't painless, the REPs are sometimes aimless
But you can't solve the problem without them.

The zap seemed to apply with ease,
but then the system tasks did freeze
It almost made the system wheeze
The cure was worse than the disease.

But code that's thus corrected
Can do the unexpected
Especially when run with zero keys.

I went back to the microfiche, instead of going to the beach
It took a second 'til I saw
A LOAD that should have been a STORE.

And I-B-M ain't painless, they never give you changes
Until they've got your system on the floor.

I-B-M, the moral here, which I hope I have made quite clear
This O-C-Only course you steer
Is not as good as may appear.

'Cause O-C-Only's painful
And I-B-M is blame-ful
If they with-hold the best kind of support.

Song 110 Notre Dame Fight Song
We are the great D-B-A's
We get the blame, but never the praise
Churning out those P-S-B's
Those data base reorgs and D-B-D's.
When pointers go on the blink
Eight fifty-two's can drive you to drink
We'll be there to save the day
Three cheers for the D-B-A's.

We are the great D-B-A's
Loading your data - hoping it stays
H-DAM, HI-DAM, G-SAM too
With bit maps and free space just for you
Fast path and D-B-R-C
Logical children (virtually)
We'll just plow right through this maze
Three cheers for the D-B-A's.

Song 111 When I'm Sixty-Four
As it gets older, M-V-S grows,now we need X-A
Every new development takes C-S-A
Virtual storage ebbing away
What's that you're saying? 'A new machine'?
Thirty-three's old hat
A couple of million, just to stand still then
Users won't like that.

Now that we've got it, X-A is up, still it won't perform
Paging is the problem now the experts say
C-P-U pow'r wasting away.
Buy some more memory, channels and disks
Will it ever end ?
You'd better concede it, they'd have you believe it
I-B-M's your friend.

Song 112 Ode to Joy (Beethoven)
JES-2 joy of man's desiring
Answer to our user's prayers
Keeps our C-P-U from tiring
And our staff from heavy cares.

First called HASP from
Down south in Houston
Now called JES-2
I don't know why.

Makes our cust-o-mers so happy
Makes the system really fly.

JES-2 joy of man's desiring
Far and wide its users be
Many funny songs inspiring
Very loud and quite off-key.

With these songs we
Sing of its glories
At ten in SCIDS
Each Thursday night.

Maybe all the songs will help the
JES-3 shops to see the light.

Song 113 Swannee
CME, CME, how I love ya, how I love ya,
My dear old CME
Every six months I see
Sal, Ruth, Wes, Lois, and
B-A-R-Y even tho' my
System's waiting for me, prayin' for me
Way down in Houston.
The folks at GUIDE will see me no more
'Cause I just love that CME lore.

Song 114 Hello Muddah, Hello Faddah
Hello honey, won't be home soon
Here I am at the machine room,
Genning CICS (say "kicks"), I'd better be quick
Cause our salesman told my boss it's called "strategic".

Went to SHARE class - learned to tune it
What the hell's a logical unit?
Turn-around-points, task still purges
Backout buffers spill to VSAM when CICS surges.

Take me home, I can't do all this work alone
It seems we need a new machine
In order to assemble just-a-little-T-C-T...

Take me home, next time I think I'll roll my own
I know this thing is not for me
My S-E says I should have looked at I-M-S D-C.

Phone is ringing - it's a user
Wants to know why we abuse her.
She is hung up - is it buffers?
Strings or locks or threads or paging? How she suffers.

Wait a minute - it's stopped failing
VSAM's humming - VTAM's sailing
Log tapes spinning - we can't top it
Now I think that only M-R-O can stop it.

Song 115 All in Family Theme (Those Were the Days)
Back when we had three-sixty
Runnin' under P-C-P
Startin' reader oh-oh-cee
Those were the days.

Console really had a bell
and a key to I-P-L
Meters, lights, and switches
made it feel more like a machine.

Didn't need no S-M-P
Fixed my bugs by E-S-P
Su-perzap and PTF-L-E.
Those were the days.

Running under M-F-T
HASP and O-S M-V-T
None of this complex-ity
Those were the days.

Didn't need no IPO then
Everyone could do HASPGEN
Mister we could use some code from
that old HASP-team again....

Didn't run in problem state
Only had to do dollar wait
Gee our-data-cell-ran-great

Those were the days ......

Song 116 This Bud's for You (Budweiser Jingle)
This bug's from you.
It is the kind of thing that no one else would do.
This bug's from you.
It has a LOAD where anyone would put a LOAD ADDRESS.
There is no other one that makes this kind of mess.
You are the only one who screws up LOAD ADDRESS.
When you say Bug-blaster
You've said it all.

Song 117 Puff the Magic Dragon
chorus
JES The mighty system, ran my C-P-U
It did my work with-out a quirk
And never was I blue

An M-V-S sub-system, JES-2 could not fail
It printed jobs and punched my cards
And e-ven did NET-mail

My users were unhappy, M-V-S was hard to learn
They wanted something eas-i-er, a place where they could turn

So when my boss assigned me, to find a better way
I started searching for soft-ware
That might make their day

I thought we would try U-NIX, but that was even worse
While I-B-M has P-L-S, 'C' is far too terse

My time was running out, and I was not inspired
I knew it would be two more weeks
Before I would be fired
chorus

I was getting worried, and so I came to SHARE
I asked around and what I found
Was a big teddy BEAR

Software that was simple, Eas-y to understand
With V-M in the world today
All others should be canned

My users were now happy, Content and worry free
V-M and friendly C-M-S
Sure saved the day for me

The only thing I'll miss, that M-V-S pro-vides
Is all that great JES-2 source code
That I-B-M can't hide
chorus

Some systems live forever, but not so M-V-S
'Cause T-S-O and S-M-P
Are too much of a mess

V-M is like heaven, It's software you can trust
But as I'm sure you're all aware
That source code is a must

My eyes looked t'ward tomorrow, as I scratched my C-D-S
I'd never have to worry now
Which SYS-MODS I'd regress

Without a super-visor, JES-2 could not be run
And so that code of Houston fame
Just rode into the sun.
chorus

Song 118 I'm a Lumberjack and I'm OK (Monty Python)
chorus
I do M-V-S and I'm O-K.
I work all night, and I work all day
V-M makes it easy, we're going to X-A

With INFO-SYS , I scan the queue.
I'm going to turn blue.
I'm waiting for my phone to ring.
I'm queued at level two.
chorus

N-J-E Is alright too, it works just like they said.
Off-load did not work too well.
My users want me dead.
chorus

JES-2 is my latest bug, the change team are all fools.
They just gave me one more P-E.
And wiped out all my SPOOLs.
chorus

To power up the eighty-one, takes an e-ter-ni-ty
This-is just fine with I-B-M
 'cause users think its me.
chorus

Song 119 MTA (No. 2)
chorus
But did it ever return, no, it never returned
And its fate is still unlearned
It may run forever, if they can't fix the system
It's the job that never returned

Let me tell you all the story of a man named Charlie
On a tragic and fateful day
Put his card deck in the reader, read the job into the system
And it started execution in class A.
chorus

Now this program was so simple (just a hundred lines of FORTRAN)
Which had executed perfectly before.
But the data being processed got this job into big trouble
Putting lots and lots of garbage in low core.

Charlie's job kept on a-runnin', in a loop in supervisor
Where a user should never be.
Even op-erator CANCEL couldn't throw it off the system
For it's executing with a zero key

Charlie hassles all the clerks working at the ready window
Crying "What will become of me?
Can I tell my supervisor that this simple little program
Put the operating system on its knees?"
chorus

So the system operator called the chief systems guru
Saying "What should I do, pray tell?
Charlie's job just keeps a-runnin' and it's chewing up the system
And the interactive throughput's gone to hell

Now this guru shook his head for he hadn't any guesses
Of the reason the job was stuck
'Cause he hadn't any fiche and he hadn't any source code
And he knew that he was out of luck
chorus

Oh, you customers of Big Blue don't you think that it's a scandal
O-C-O lets us crash each day.
Fight the system bugs, vote for FULL SOURCE SYSTEMS
And get Charlie's job completed today.
chorus
Or it will never return, no 'twill never return
And its fate will stay unlearned.
It will run forever if they can't fix the system
With no source, we're gonna be burned

Song 120 When Johnny Comes Marching Home
When you I-P-L your M-V-S, Hurrah, Hurrah.
You bring up a JES and S-M-F, Hurrah, Hurrah.
You face the console and bow to pray.
'Cause when it ABENDs it wrecks your day.
When you I-P-L your system you hope it stays.

You start-up V-TAM and nick-F too, Hurrah, Hurrah.
The logical and the physical U's, Hurrah, Hurrah.
You are not happy, but understand
Why there are no cycles to meet demands
When you run with V-TAM net-working S-N-A.

And then you crank-up C-I-C-S, Hurrah, Hurrah.
Or maybe you run with I-M-S, Hurrah, Hurrah.
You can bring your database up online
And hope that V-SAM is feeling fine
And just hold your breath...
As transactions come up the line.

If you LOGON to T-S-O, Hurrah, Hurrah.
You'll find response is really slow, Hurrah, Hurrah.
And you wonder how a P-C can run as good as a thirty-eighty-one
And can do more work than ever before was done.

When M-V-S comes crashing down, Hurrah, Hurrah.
The customers all make ugly sounds, Hurrah, Hurrah.
Your boss will show up to ask you why ?
You haven't got a new fix to try ?
Where is I-B-M when you need an alibi ?

The last six months have been a bitch. Hurrah, Hurrah.
Your de-veloping a nervous twitch, Hurrah, Hurrah.
But the SHARE meet isn't so far away, you leave for N'awlins on sat-ur-day.
Where at least you'll find some peace and tranquility.

Finally it's time to come to SHARE, Hurrah, Hurrah.
And see all your friends and buddies there, Hurrah, Hurrah.
But the hotel clerk just stands there and smiles
There's not a vacant hotel for miles
And we have not got your booking in our files.

But you are so glad to be away, Hurrah, Hurrah.
You really don't care where you must stay, Hurrah, Hurrah.
 'Cause you're with your friends and you understand
You know they'll give you a helping hand
'Cause thats what this kind of SHAREing is all about.

And finally at SCIDS on Thursday night, Hurrah, Hurrah.
Shoulder-to-shoulder, packed in tight, Hurrah, Hurrah.
We start to sing as pianos play
With songs like this can you stay away ?
We all sing-a-long as evening turns into day.

These words that I write  and sing to you , Hurrah, Hurrah.
Are ex-amples of the things we do, Hurrah, Hurrah.
As the programmers come from near and far
By train and plane and bus and car
To swap songs and stories 'round the open bar.

But as all good things must someday close, Hurrah, Hurrah.
And that is the way the story goes, Hurrah, Hurrah.
I'll leave you with this closing rhyme
I'll see you all in six months time
As we come to SHARE to share and share again.

Song 121 There's No Business Like Show Business
There're no meetings like SHARE meetings, like no meetings we know
Everything about SHARE is inviting
SCIDs and sessions all the way to BOFs
Everything about SHARE is exciting
It keeps us going when times are tough.

There're no people like SHARE people, they help when you are low
When your system's down and out and very sick
A call to SHARE friends can turn the trick
Next day you give your P-S-R the perfect fix
We can't live without SHARE.

There're no meetings like SHARE meetings, like no meetings we know
Friends from overseas come here to meet us
I-B-M walks with us side by side
All together we can make things happen
And make our future ours to decide

Now SHARE past is a great past, now thirty years on a roll
In L.A. the seventeen said we'll begin
And SHARE has taken it on to win
We'll make it even better as we all pitch in
Let's keep sharing in SHARE.

Song 122 Way Down Yonder in New Orleans
Way down yonder, some years ago
System throughput was really slow
And the users were screaming (You know what I mean)
Managers they were really sore
Reputations were really poor

STOP!  You ought to come to SHARE
To find --- out what to do
STOP!  You'll find out how to make
Your sys-tem work for you
We've been SHAREing for thirty years
Helping run our machines
Now we're meeting in New Orleans

Meetings scheduled form coast to coast
We've got SCIDS and we've got SHARE POST
We've got plenty of sessions
(You know what I mean)
Panel session, tutorials too
Working sessions which are for you

STOP!  And tell your boss of all
The things--- you do at SHARE
STOP!  And tell you boss enough
To make it clear you care
That your shop gets its money's worth
From those SHARE people keen
Way down yonder in New Orleans.

Song 123 When You Wish Upon A Star (No. 1)
When you branch upon a star, makes no difference where you are
An-ny target not to far, You can go-- to---

Branch back to compare-and-swap, makes a loop you think will stop
When your update is com-plete, You'll just fall through.

Use it in a scanning loop, look for bytes all in a group
Blanks, or other strings called "dup" you can com-press

But, if your branch is too extreme
Off the page or off the screen
Pro-duct test will start to scream,  and say to you.

Coding practices like these, lead to eyestrain and disease.
Unlinked lists and troubled trees, and bugs you'll rue.

So, use a label, if you please!  Helps to understanding ease.
Keeps the system off it's knees, and helps you too.

So, if you branch upon a star, and your branch has gone too far.
Any code that they A-PAR we'll send-- to-- you----.

Song 124 There's a Hole in the Bucket
HENRY:
There's a bug in the system, dear Liza, dear Liza.
There's a bug in the system, dear Liza, a BUG !
LIZA:
Then fix it, dear Henry, dear Henry, dear Henry.
Then fix it, dear Henry, dear Henry, FIX IT !
HENRY:
Just how shall I fix it, dear Liza, dear Liza.
Just how shall I fix it, dear Liza, Just how ?
LIZA:
With Assembler, dear Henry, dear Henry, dear Henry.
With Assembler, dear Henry, dear Henry, with BAL.
HENRY:
It's object code only, dear Liza, dear Liza.
It's object code only, dear Liza, dear NOT SOURCE !
LIZA:
Then ZAP it, dear Henry, dear Henry, dear Henry.
Then ZAP it, dear Henry, dear Henry, ZAP IT !
HENRY:
But I haven't the fiches, dear Liza, dear Liza.
But I haven't the fiches, dear Liza, NO FICHE !
LIZA:
Then call in the change team, dear Henry, dear Henry.
Then call in the change team, to take their best shot.
HENRY:
They say it's a feature, dear Liza, dear Liza.
They say it's a feature, IT WORKS AS DESIGNED !
LIZA:
Appeal it, dear Henry, dear Henry, dear Henry.
Appeal it, dear Henry, dear Henry, AND WIN!
HENRY:
It's a PUB change, dear Liza, dear Liza, dear Liza.
It's a PUB change, dear Liza, the page now is blank.
LIZA:
Then stuff it dear Henry, dear Henry, dear Henry.
Then stuff it dear Henry, in I-B-M's ear.
HENRY:
There's a bug in the system, dear Liza, dear Liza.
There's a bug in the system, dear Liza, a BUG !

Song 125 Oh The Farmer and the Cowman Should be Friends
Oh, the vendor and the user should be friends.
Oh, the vendor and the user should be friends.
One side wants a hefty fee, the other wants to get it free.
But that's no reason why they can't be friends.
chorus
Datacenter folks should stick together.
Datacenter folks should all be one.
Just get them talking at a meeting.
Then step back and watch the fun.

I'd like to say a word for the vendors.
They market programs that they say you need.
They make your system run, like a bullet from a gun.
(But they never offer stuff that`s guaranteed)

I'd like to say a word for the users.
They work like dogs to make their systems clean.
They fix the vendors' bugs, that crawl out from under rugs.
(But they add some more that make the thing obscene)

But, the vendor and the user should be friends.
But, the vendor and the user should be friends.
Vendors claim their code is swell, users' throughput goes to hell.
But that's no reason why they can't be friends.
chorus

The users want the best they can afford.
But vendors want sales sure as death and taxes.
If I-B-M won't budge, and ship source instead of sludge.
Then we'll all be running U-NIX on our VAX-es !
chorus

Song 126 The Sounds of Silence
Hello F-E my old friend., I have to talk to you again.
Because an ABEND soft-ly creeping, crashed the system while I was sleeping.
And the ABEND, that was hiding in my core.
For-ever more,
will be the cause of crashes.

Through endless dumps I looked alone, without an F.E. on the phone.
'Neath the halo of a tensor light, I looked at every single bit and byte.
'Til my brain was seared by the flash of an insight rare.
And then and there, I found the cause of crashes.

And in that spot of light I saw, ten thousand branches, maybe more.
Branches coded without any base, branches going into outer space.
Branches branching... where no code had ever been.
It was a sin,
this silly cause of crashes.

"Fools," said I, "You do not know,
Branches with no place to go,
Cannot make your super-visor run,
But can cut out all your weekend fun."
But my words-- like simple no-ops fell, down the well,
And echoed like the knell of crashes.

All Poughkeepsie bowed and prayed, to the systems they had made.
And the console scrolled up its warning, in the line that it was forming.
And the line said  "The code of the future is written in P-L-S,
Except for JES."
"About the source ... we're silent."

Song 127 A Chorus Line
One - op-er-ating system, Making all the hardware run
One - set of pub-li-cations (Weighing less than a ton)

One set of system commands, To make u-sers - learn
And it is free of the glitches
That make - them - burn

One - simple in-ter-face that programs can invoke with ease
Making all our tasks a breeze
And eas-y -
V ! M ! Is the system's name and
So ! Great ! Is the system's fame that
It's - the - one !

One...system that can run 'most any type of S-C-P
One...host for M-V-S and
DOS and even old M-V-T

One C-P-U for them all
And the u-sers, too
If you can't bear to run V-S
Then it's for you

One...tightly written system
Very easy to maintain
S-M-P it does disdain
(It's source - code - )
V ! M !  Runs the system cleanly
'Cause it's written very leanly
It's - the - one !

Song 128 The Canadian Railroad Trilogy (The American SPOOLER Trilogy)
There was a time in this fair land
when O-S would barely run.
And our race to beat the Russians to the moon
was not yet won.
Long before three-seventy and long before V-S.
When good paging algorithms
were the dream of T-S-S.

But I-B-M programmers,
like history, have no bounds
As to the Spacecraft Center
they came from all around.
They calculated orbits, designed the launchers tall,
Built the sub-routines
and the drivers for the good of us all.

But when their jobs were queued,
waiting in the input stack.
Those programmers grew restless
for to get their output back
Their minds were overflowing
with the President's dead-line.
He wants an American on the moon by the end of
Nineteen-Sixty-Nine.

For they looked to the future and what did they see?
They saw their I-B-M computers
from the sea to the sea.
Bringing the profits all up to Armonk
Distributing dividends from here to Podunk.

Look away, said they, across this mighty land.
From the eastern shore to the western strand.

Switching the messages and printing the checks,
Computing all the nation's answers
in decimal and hex.
Optimize performance; our stock will go-go.
Gotta write the new spooler
'Cause the system's too slow.

Helping all the programmers get faster turn-around
For Project Apollo down here in Houston-town.
Open system bottlenecks; let more jobs flow.
Gotta write the new Spooler
'Cause the system's too slow.
Write the new Spooler
'Cause the system's too slow.

Behind the green cactus the sun is declining.
The stars they come stealing at the close of the day.
Way off in Houston our loved ones lie sleeping
Beyond the great freeway in our homes far away.

We are the coders who work upon The Spooler
Pushing our pencils in the bright Texas sun.
Living on barbecue and drinking Lone Star Beer
Bending our backs 'till the long days are done.

We're the programmers who work upon The Spooler
Pushing our erasers in the bright Texas sun.
Replacing SYS-JOB-QUEUE,
Debugging HASP-PURR-PU.
Bending our backs 'till The Spooler is done.

So...Read in the cards.
Write them on the SPOOL packs
Getting more data stored
in the same number of tracks.
Read the cards back in,
and then give them to O-S.
To do it any other way would only be a mess.

Intercept the SYS-OUT,
write it on the SPOOL packs, too.
Drive the printers at full blast;
multi-leave to remote 2.
One I-P-L a day is the most we'll ever see!
Someday I-B-M might even make HASP an S-C-P!!!

Oh, the song of the future has been sung.
All the battles have been won.
On the mountain-top we stand
All the world at our command.
We have out-programmed the rest.
And our Spooler is the best!

For there was a time in this fair land
when O-S would barely run.
And modifying operating systems was no fun.
Long before three-seventy and long before V-S.
When good paging algorithms
were the dream of T-S-S.
And nobody in the world
had ever heard of J-E-S.
And now that good old Spooler...
is the heart of M-V-S!!!

Song 129 My Bonnie Lies Over the Ocean (No. 2)
My message went out over BITNET
My message went out o'r the sea.
From EARN it crossed over to JANET.
Oh bring back an answer to me.
chorus
Bring back, bring back,
Oh bring back an answer to me, to me
Bring back, bring back,
Please bring back an answer to me.

I once wrote my letters on paper.
I once used a pencil or pen.
But now that I don't weigh his bag down,
I can speak to my postman again.
chorus

There once was a network called ARPA
And V-NET in-side I-B-M,
Then BITNET for some of us SHARE types,
Now I'll never write letters again!
chorus

Song 130 Happy Birthday to You
HASPy birthday to you
 HASPy birthday to you
You're our fav'rite sub-system--
HASPy birthday JES-2

More than twen-ty years old
But your code's good as gold.
And your function and performance
Beats the other JES cold.

HASPy birthday JES2.
From your SHARE singing crew.
Let us raise voices proudly
In a tribute to--- you----

Song 131 On the Street Where You Live
We've worked weeks and weeks, and some over-time
Just to bring this thirty-seven-twenty-five on-line.
We get sports, and news, and some M-T-V.
But our net-work just sits silently.

We've genned N-C-P, talked to our F-E.
We've switched buses, tags and cables all so pointlessly.
All our high speed lines..., now S-D-L-C
All our links show no load, virtually.

And oh---- that glorious feeling
Just to know ... bits are coming this way.
That overpowering feeling, that you get
switching from bi-synch to S-N-A.

Use debugging tools, so the F-Es say
Things are not bro-ken,
they were designed to work that way.
Though we try in vain, its driving us insane
Knowing this is how we now must live.

Put a scope on-line, and don't bother me.
Get some sleep,
and have another round of drinks or three
Let some time go by, see what box I buy.
I-B-M you will get what you give.

Song 132 Pick a Bale O'Cotton
Gonna' jump down, spin around
Reformat the DASD.
Jump down, spin around
Replace an H-D-A.

Gonna' jump down, spin around
Do a C-P sysgen.
Jump down, spin around.
Just another VM day.

Save ta-bles in S-N-T
Map used extents and then the free.

Gonna' jump down, spin around
Allo-cate some temp space
Jump down, spin around.
Throw a dump away.

Gonna' jump down, spin around
measurin' the page rate
Jump down, spin around
Just another VM day.

Communication dropped again!
Reload E-P and then re-gen.

Gonna' jump down, spin around
set VERIFY in HEX
Jump down, spin around
Convert EXECs to REXX.

Gonna' jump down, spin around
Curse the PROFS displays
Jump down, spin around
Just another VM day.

Access disks from A to Z
All's well running virtually

Gonna' jump down, spin around
Change the system passwords
Jump down, spin around
Let no one on today

Gonna' jump down, spin around
Aggravate some users
Jump down, spin around
Just another VM day.

Song 133 Officer Krupke (West Side Story)
Dear ---- Kindly Mister Fineman
You gotta understand
Our system's input backlog
Is getting out of hand
Our C-P-U is flat out
The spool pack's really full
Golly, Jerry,
Don't feed us that bull

So, gee, Mister Fineman,
We're very upset
The sale team promised throughput
That we never can get.
The wait light is off
On our new C-P-U
And now we all
Are feeling blue (feeling blue!)

Feeling blue, feeling blue
Yes, we're feeling blue
For the system makes us feel so blue!

(Spoken)
-  Gee, that is such a sad story
-  Lemme tell it to the world!
-  Just tell it to the the support center!

I----- cobbled up a STAGE 1
Assembled it one night
Then ran a STAGE 2 job stream
It seemed to go alright
But when the users tried it
It crashed right through the floor
ABEND
Dumps showed
Garbage throughout core

So now, Mister Fineman,
We're sure in a mess
The system take much more and so
The user gets less.
We APAR'ed the problems
With evidence true,
And wait for calls
From Level Two (Level Two!)

Level Two, Level Two
'Cause we're feeling blue
While we wait for calls
From Level Two

(Spoken)
-  In my opinion, this symptom hasn't been previously reported
-  Hey, I got a new problem !!!
-  So? Let's put it out to a second level!

The ---- second level callback
Came in at five P.M.
And when we got to talking
I knew our hopes were dim
I really started sweating
When L-2 queried me:
"Won't you tell me
What's an S-V-C?"

Gee, Manager Fineman,
Support is a mess
The problems that we've got give us
A sense of distress
The change team insists that
They're features, not bugs:
(That's sweeping problems under rugs!) (Under rugs!)

Under rugs, under rugs
Sweeping under rugs,
Yes, they're sweeping problems under rugs.

(Spoken)
-  Hear ye, Hear ye, in de opinion of dis change team dis problem's
    'cause dis user didn't read de design specifications.
-  What's the pub number?
-  I can't tell you; it's IBM Confidential

I ------- wasn't very happy
With what they said to me
They simply couldn't fix it
Not even for a fee
I asked them why the code broke
The said they didn't know:
They can't fix it
'Cause it's O-C-O

Gee, Officer Fineman
The system's a dog
The bloody thing has proved to be
A real resource hog
We like it to be fixed
Although we're resigned
To hear it is working
As designed (as designed!)

As designed, as designed
Working as designed
Meaning that-- it's broken as designed

(Spoken:)
- The JCL is crazy !
- The messages all stink
- The system code is hazy
- It's driving me to drink
- The APAR list is growing
- The P-E list has grown

Jer-ry, we've got
Troubles of our own!

So, please Mister Fineman
We're down on our knees,
For no one wants a system that will
Blow when you sneeze.
To all of the change teams,
This thing must be said:
If you cannot fix it:
Drop Dead !

Song 134 If I Only Had a Brain (The Wizard of Oz)
When real storage you are needin'
And your system is a-bleedin'
The response time is a pain.

Busy queues I would be prunin'
And performance I'd be tunin'
If I only had a frame.

I could swap-out all the spaces
To disk or other places,
To alleviate the strain.

Oh, the pages I'd be pagin'
And the data sets a stagin'
If I only had a frame.

I could do some more dispatches
ATTACH some more ATTACHes.
Ah, the queues that I could drain.

If my storage wasn't lackin'
And my interrupts a-stackin'
If I only had a frame.

I might execute the job queue
And run HASPCOMM, and PR-Poo
And checkpoint without pain.

And my lines would be transmittin'
And my printers busy printin'
If I only had a frame.

I could run a few transactions
And data base compactions
And search the record chains

All my caches would be hittin'
My commits would be commitin'
And my jobs would not be sittin'
If in storage I had fittin'
If I only had a frame.

Song 135 Home On the Range (No. 3)
Oh, I have a new phone
With a mind of its own
And small alphameric display.
But to use it you see
takes an ad-vanced degree
And a training course that takes a day.

ROLM, ROLM, my ROLMPhone
where the callers can't hear what I say
where never is heard a non-digital word
and the circuits are busy all day.

Oh, this tan little phone
with the beeping ring tone
dosen't work in the old-fashioned way
When you hang up on me
Switchhook magnetically
Might just keep your line tied up all day.

ROLM phones are deranged
They're the nightmare of tele-funny
While the features, as sold, are exciting and bold
They don't work right, in-tu-i-tively.

Oh, forward my calls
to the room down the hall
and please don't let them go astray.
And when I'm on hold
Please just let me grow old
Please don't take my connection away.

ROLM, ROLM, my ROLMPhone
Computerized private exchange
is amazing to see, but un-ex-pectedly
Has to I-P-L to make a change.

Oh the thing called PhoneMail
Is a pain in the tail.
A recording is all you can hear.
Leave your name at the tone
A light blinks on the phone
And your party will call you next year.

PhoneMail is deranged.
It's a nightmare to call IBM
When you press zero-pound
and you hear that same sound
You have got a recording again.

This high-tech new phone
was designed by a gnome.
The trad-i-tional I-B-M way.
'Cause out there at ROLM
they don't talk on the phone
They communicate a-nother way.

ROLM, ROLM, my dear ROLM
Now an I-B-M owned com-pany
While it's easy to see
I-B-M paid the fee
ROLM was'nt re-built in a day!

Song 136 George M. Cohan Medley
verse (Yankee Doodle Dandy)
I'm a HASP-a-doodle dandy.
I'll run with HASP until I die.
I-B-M tells me it's called JES-2,
But they will not tell me why.
I've got a HASP-a-doodle mod file,
On-- the tape from C-B-T.
Mods can make the system better.
'Long as we've got source code.
I made HASP do it all for me !
verse (Mary)
For it is V-M, V-M.
Does it all with style and grace.
Although the SVCs are M-V-Ts
V-M is an ace.

You'll find in V-M V-M,
Main-ten-ance is no hard case:
For if a bug there be, A new C-P
Quickly is in place!
verse (Give My Regards to Broadway)
Give my regards to Houston
Remember me to Wheaton, too.
Tell all the gang at Forty Saw Mill River
I Still want HASP-two.
It was so system-friendly
But I-B-M loves O-C-O
IF JES-2 ever comes that way
We'll tell Big Blue just where to go !
verse (It's a Grand Old Flag)
It's a grand old HASP, It's a high flying HASP
And for e-ver our jobs it will run
It's the system of, the code I love.
The source of our pro-graming fun.
Every job runs true though it's now called JES-2.
And it no longer is type three.
Should old Chuck Forney be forgot?
Keep your jobs on that grand old HASP!

Song 137 Sixteen Tons (No. 2)
I had a bug about a month ago
the system was dead or really slow
I took a dump; I looked at core.
I ain't gonna run my job anymore.

You shoot sixteen bugs whaddya get...
Ten A-PARs closed as DOC, the other ones RET.
I'd fix 'em myself. But since they've gone O-C-O.
I can't find the bugs if I can't read the code.

I just got a call from the level two man.
Said "I got some bad news, I did the best I can"
But development say's it's not a quirk
That is the way it is supposed to work.
chorus
How can that code be designed that way?
It wouldn't survive the light of day
It's easy he says and he gives me a shrug
They don't write the specs until you find the bugs!

They say "no source" is the American way?
I guess it's true but it's sad to say.
You can beg for it...  on bended knees,
but it does no good unless you're Japanese!

Iv'e worked my job for job twenty-one years.
A lot of joy and a lot of tears.
But if the code is all the specs they write,
I won't give it up without a damn good fight.

Song 138 Music, Music, Music
Log another user in,
to the system and below,
showing all the world why we run...
MUSIC! MUSIC! MUSIC!

There is little it won't do.
Better far than V-S-2.
Everybody loves the sound of...
MUSIC! MUSIC! MUSIC!

O-S,
We don't run slow-ess, for...
MUSIC runs so wonderfully clean, when...
in a virt-u-al machine. So...

Log another user in,
to the systems once again,
showing all the world why we run...
MUSIC! MUSIC! MUSIC!

Song 139 Twelve Days of Christmas (No. 2)
On the first day of CICS'mess (say kicks-mess) my system gave to me
a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the second day of CICS'mess my system gave to me,
Two P-S-R's and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the third day of CICS'mess my system gave to me
Three aux traces
Two P-S-R's and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the fourth day of CICS'mess my system gave to me
Four P-M-R's, Three aux traces,
Two P-S-R's and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the fifth day of CICS'mess my system gave to me
Five A-PAR things....,
Four P-M-R's, Three aux traces,
Two P-S-R's, and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the sixth day of CICS'mess my system gave to me
Six traps a-trapping
Five A-PAR things....
Four P-M-R's, Three aux traces,
Two P-S-R's, and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the seventh day of CICS'mess my system gave to me
Seven swaps a-swapping, Six traps a-trapping
Five A-PAR things....
Four P-M-R's, Three aux traces,
Two P-S-R's, and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the eighth day of CICS'mess my system gave to me
Eight megs ABENDing
Seven swaps a-swapping, Six traps a-trapping
Five A-PAR things....
Four P-M-R's, Three aux traces,
Two P-S-R's, and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the ninth day of CICS'mess my system gave to me
Nine regions cancelled, Eight megs ABENDing
Seven swaps a-swapping, Six traps a-trapping
Five A-PAR things....
Four P-M-R's, Three aux traces,
Two P-S-R's, and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the tenth day of CICS'mess my system gave to me
Ten jobs a-leaving
Nine regions cancelled, Eight megs ABENDing
Seven swaps a-swapping, Six traps a-trapping
Five A-PAR things....
Four P-M-R's, Three aux traces,
Two P-S-R's, and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the eleventh day of CICS'mess my system gave to me
Eleven printers printing, Ten jobs a-leaving
Nine regions cancelled, Eight megs ABENDing
Seven swaps a-swapping, Six traps a-trapping
Five A-PAR things....
Four P-M-R's, Three aux traces,
Two P-S-R's, and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

On the twelveth day of CICS'mess my system gave to me
Twelve dumps a dumping
Eleven printers printing, Ten jobs a-leaving
Nine regions cancelled, Eight megs ABENDing
Seven swaps a-swapping, Six traps a-trapping
Five A-PAR things....
Four P-M-R's, Three aux traces,
Two P-S-R's, and a full DA-dump on a dead tree.

Song 140 Santa Claus is Coming to Town
In two eighty eight
one hot August day,
Big Blue announced
Their new E-S-A.
I-B-M is getting you down.

They said X-A's out of virtual store.
It's getting the boot, right outta the door.
I-B-M is getting you down.

With systems ma-anaged storage,
and hi-perspaces too.
The systems gonna page so much
You won't know what else to do!

Oh.....

New code abounds
There's more on the way.
And new version numbers
mean more bills to pay.
I-B-M is getting you down.

There's a new M-V-S and D-F-P too.
You just can't keep up with the code from big blue.
I-B-M is getting you down.

Your S-E's started planning.
He'll never let you be.
He'll bother you until, you buy a ninety model 'E'.

Oh.....

Your three-oh-eight ones are now ob-solete.
They're worthless as hell, and onto the street.
I-B-M is getting you down.

The PRiSM feature looks really O-K.
But under the sheets, it's V-M-X-A.
I-B-M is getting you down.

With hardware from Poughkeepsie,
and software from out west.
They'll bring it all into you shop
for it's in-te-gration test.

Oh......

You better look out, and start right away.
You'd better plan now; to install E-S-A.
I-B-M is getting you down.

I-B-M is getting you down !!

Song 141 Three Blind Mice
I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
My long run-ning B-M-P is in a race,
Until it gets in a deadly embrace,
With M-P-Ps and we run out of space,
On I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
With M-F-S no basic edit we need.
MIDs and MODs handle data we've keyed.
After on-line change no bounce do we need.
On I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
With one point and D-L-1 SAS.
Cross mem-o-ry gaves us some gas.
With two point two V-S-C has now passed.
On I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
With one point three went O-L-D-S.
After ar-chive to S-L-D-S.
It outshines T-A-P-E-S.
On I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
The control region had a "U" one thirteen.
Level two said 'twas to be very clean
Oh, I-B-M how could you be so mean.
On IMS, IMS.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
My P-S-B's vanished into thin air,
Ever since MOD blocks, I really don't care.
After on-line change, we're back on the air.
on I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
To block level sharing I must go.
Good-bye P-I, can't use you no mo'.
I'm passing the buck, please don't be slow.
on I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
With M-S-C, multiple D-Bs I share
Uh-oh, it looks like I'm on RECON SPARE.
I'm short of OLDS and the archives aren't there
on I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
I move right along with Virtual Fetch,
Pre-load, too with nary a catch,
You're code's not re-useable. You son-of-a-batch?
on I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
I converted to Fast Path with Version two dot two.
With E-M-H I don't even queue......
No index to search? What will I do?
on I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
My database stopped, the queue did suspend.
DIS Q TRAN doesn't show me the trend
Oh my gosh, Where will it all end.
On I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it ran, see how it ran.
We assembled the module without O-C-O.
We'd look through the DSECTs, don't you know.
How could second level be so slow.
On I-M-S, I-M-S.

I-M-S, I-M-S, See how it runs, see how it runs.
In the early days, we risked our careers,
On a D-B-M-S t'would perform said the seers.
Came true as they said these last twenty years.
On I-M-S, I-M-S, I-M-S, I-M-S....... etc.

Song 142 Yesterday (No. 3)
E-S-A ... Is the newest thing announced today.
Much better than old plain X-A ?
Oh, I can't wait for E-S-A.

Suddenly ... X-A just looks like a big P-C.
Just two gigabytes of mem-or-ee.
Oh no that's not enough for me!

That you'll have to change is arranged.
That's what they say.
X-A came and went in what seemed just like a day,
day, day... day.

E-S-A ...  Is the only game I have to play.
I-B-M says it's a better way.
I must be-lieve in E-S-A.

I must be-lieve in E-S-A.

Song 143 My Country 'Tis of Thee (No. 2)
My O-E-M  P-C.
Runs in-com-pat-ibly.
And so I cry.

LAN where my software tried.
LAN where my micro died.
From every maintenance side.
Let source code reign.

My CICS (kicks) is good to me.
Except it isn't free.
And so I cry.
I hope their code is right.
With no source code in sight.
Protected now with all thy might.
Oh woe is me.

Song 144 Mamas Don't Let Your Babies Grow Up to be Cowboys
SYS-PROGS ain't easy to love  and they're harder to hold,
He'd rather give you a ZAP than any source code,
Object code only, no documentation,
and each fix turns up a new bug.
He wrote it, he'll fix it and don't you mess with it,
Then he'll sweep it all under the rug.

Mamas, don't let your babies grow up to be SYS-PROGs,
Don't let them write A-PARS and lay down the ZAPs.
Working long hours til their memories lapse.
Mamas, don't let your babies grow up to be SYS-PROGs,
They'll never be home and they're always alone.
Even with systems they love.

SYS-PROGs like making believe that their code is all magic
Reading a hex dump is something that someone else does.
And them that do sometimes don't know how to take him,
He's not wrong, he's just different but his pride won't let him
Tell you what his error was.

Mamas, don't let your babies grow up to be SYS-PROGs,
Don't let them write A-PARS and lay down the ZAPs.
Working long hours til their memories lapse.
Mamas, don't let your babies grow up to be SYS-PROGs,
They'll run off to SHARE and they won't even care,
If things have blown up at home.

Song 145 New York, New York
Start speading the news.
SHARE's running this week
I wanna be a part of it.
New York, New York.

This I-B-M news.
Is trying to say
They're gonna take our source away
New York, New York

I wanna know a sup-port cen-ter that never sleeps.
To find each P-T-F please,
Only in S-M-P E.

My I-B-M blues,
are fadin away.
SHARE'll help to cure to each others woes
In old New York.

If we can learn it there
We'll spread it everywhere
It's up to you, New York New York.

Song 146 The Brady Bunch (TV Theme)
Here's the story of a program product.
It was used to man-age networks one and all.
There were four parts working all to-gether
Like a Ne-ander-thal.

But these pro-ducts, Were just not selling.
What was needed was a win-ning strat-egy.
We'll take all this code... and we'll call it Net-View
And form a fam-i-ly.

And it stayed this way till "big blue" saw a market
Auto-ma-tion was the way to a free lunch.
We will add this function into Net-View
That's the way they all became the NetView Bunch.

The NetView Bunch, The NetView Bunch
That's the way... They became the NetView Bunch.

Song 147 Happy Wanderer (No. 2)
We are the Board, we work for SHARE,
Our ribbons are dark blue,
You know our names and faces, BUT!
Do you know what we do?

Automate (Bevis), Delegate (Moy),
Nominate (Armstrong),  Cogita-a-a-a-a-ate,
Predicate (Williams), Elevate (Pittman),
And I'm the President (Cowles).

We work on policies by day, And bylaws all night long,
Decision, budgets, and lots more,
And now this stupid song.

Strategize (Watt), "Dot the 'i's" (Caluori),
Finance buys (Burr), Theori-i-i-i-i-ize,
Answer 'why?'s (Chapman), Publicize (Palucki),
I'm still the President (Cowles).

The reps we get from IBM, The best in every way,
And then the staff from SBA, They always save the day.

Represent (Lyman), Pitch the tent (Schwartz),
Complement (Magee), Regime-e-e-e-e-ent,
Now we're done, this was fun,
With love, your President!  (Cowles)

Song 148 My Country Tis of Thee (No. 1)
My salesman sold to me
A thirty-thirty-three with sixteen megs,
A three-seven-oh-five,
Four hundred new disk drives,
Se-le-ec-to-or channels five,
Sti-ll sixteen regs.

And then he sold to me,
A sys-tem three ninety, with ES-CON LAN
Fi-ber un-der the tiles,
Channels that run for miles,
And mem-o-ree stacked up in piles
He's a happy man.

One more he had to sell C-MOS and para-lell
and air-cooled too
Mem'ry, four hundred megs
No M-P bottlenecks
Ten thousand trans per sec
It's supposed to do

We now run M-V-S,
V-TAM, C-I-C-S, and S-N-A.
They barely run the thing.
Software of which I sing
Spends all of its time pa-aging
Fro-om C-S-A.

We once ran M-V-T
On our old three-sixty, and under HASP.
Now with our new JES-3
All that we ever see
Is a-bend 0h-C-3, Go-od save our ASP.

Song 149 Daring Young Men on the Flying Trapeze (No. 2)
Oh, they say they'll be there with the greatest of ease.
Those daring young men whom we know as F.E.s
Their movements are graceful, insightful and true.
There goal is to serve and to please.

Oh, the system is constantly thrashing,
though the DASDs have cached it all in
The devices won't talk to controllers because...
The connectors are missing some pins.

Oh...
They say they'll be there with the greatest of ease.
Those daring young men whom we know as F.E.s
Their movements are graceful, insightful and true.
There goal is to serve and to please.

It's a marvel to watch him in action
Taking note of his great expertise
As he swaps one good board with another that's failed
Making more of our systems diseased.

Oh...
He said he'd be there with the greatest of ease.
But he wafts in and out like a soft summer breeze.
"The problem is simple" he says with much glee,
"But the part that you need's overseas."

Song 150 I Wish I Were an Oscar Mayer Wiener (TV Jingle)
Oh, I wish I was a happy old V-M'er.
C-M-S is where I really want to be-e-e.
'Cause if I were a happy old V-M'er.
The source would be avail-avble to me.
repeat

Song 151 Auld Lang Syne (No. 2)
O loy-al pro-gram-mers of SHARE
In song our voice we raise
To source, our friend in memory dear,
Our knowledge was her praise.

To source our doc in memory dear
For maintenance in your place
We now depend up-on big blue
To do our system's trace

For those who're saddened by this song
Our V-M group fights hard
For source withheld by I-B-M
To make their profits large.

The source once found in microfiche,
Now out-dated and worn
"Do you remember how things worked"
Now that the source is gone.

The source, our friend of many years.
To source we raise our song.
To source our hearts are ever near.
O-CO (like loco) is just plain wrong.

Song 152 When You Wish Upon a Star (No. 2)
When you wish upon a star,
Makes no difference who you are.
I-B-M will promise you
your dreams come true.

O-C-O may mean to you,
System software that's only blue,
I-B-M will promise you
your dreams come true.

If you need to know the code,
I-B-M says hit the road!
I-B-M will promise you
your dreams come true.

No more logic, no more fiche
Who said ignorance is bliss?
I-B-M will promise you
your dreams come true.

When you wish upon a star,
At SHARE meet or a-far,
IBM will promise you
your dreams come true.

Song 153 Homeward Bound (Simon & Garfunkel)
I'm sitting at my console waitin'
My job they've started auto-mat'n
Mm..mm, Mn..Mnmnmn

Las' night my boss came up to me
And told me I was history
It seems I've been replaced you see
By something he called NETVIEW 3
chorus
Un-employed...
I'm soon to bee-e-e
Un-employed

Gone from the data center.
No more commands to enter.
Gone is the pay check..
that was waiting there for me.

Well everday's an endless tour
Of user calls, mistakes galour
Mm..mm, Mn..Mnmnmn

And when the users want to know
What happended to their T-S-O
I shrug my shoulders to and fro
and tell them that I jus' don't know
chorus

Tonight I'll watch that tube again
I'll play the game and pretend
Mm..mm, Mn..Mnmnmn

The lines all look the same to me
In shades of black and white on green
I've not a clue what any mean
I'll just type "K" to clear the screen
chorus

Well here it is another day
I'm in my car, and far away.
Mm..mm, Mn..Mnmnmn

Before I left I spilled some Coke
Into the C-P-U! No joke!
I watched as automation broke
The C-P-U is up in smoke

chorus
Unemployed - it's true I am un-employed
Unemployed - I really am.

Gone from the data center.
No more commands to enter.
Gone is the pay check that was waiting there for me.
Un-employed, i'm soon to b e e, un-employed

Song 154 Dixie
Here we are in the land of mem'ry
Old jobs here, we're runnin' plenty
Look aside, look aside, look aside.  E-S-A.

In memory all jobs will stay
To run and fail throughout the day.
Look aside, look aside, look aside, E-S-A.
chorus
We'll run today in memory
Hurray, hurray
With E-S-A my job will stay
And live and die memory
Aside, aside, look aside to mem'ry.
Aside, aside, look aside to mem'ry.

There's no more swapping and a lot less paging
no more data sets that needed  staging
Look aside, look aside, lookaside, E-S-A.

We'll never write and we never read
Everything runs at light speed
Look aside, look aside, look aside, E-S-A
chorus

Song 155 Ding Dong the Witch is Dead (from the Wizard of Oz)
Ding Dong the system's dead.
The task are stopped.
The lights are red.
Ding Dong the blinking thing is dead.

I heard the bell has rung.
And JES is gone
The queues are hung
Ding Dong the blanking thing is dead.

I know that I/O is slow
It's almost stopped I know
It just can't go that slow
When running T-S-O

And heigh-ho the merry-Oh
We'll I-P-L
They'll never know
They'll never know that the system's really dead.
repeat

Song 156 Hello, Young Lovers (from the King and I)
Hello, new users, wherever you are
I hope your ABENDs are few,
Stay very close to your console tonight,
I've had such problems, too:

Be brave, new users, to schedule the day,
To bring your new system on-line:
Even if everything should fall apart
You shouldn't have to resign.

I know how it seems
to get core dumps in reams
and to put patches in on the fly
you patch left and right
in hope that you might
find the one that makes the bugs die.

So try, new users, to do what it takes
To get your machines on the road:
All of our wishes are with you tonight,
We wish you luck with your code.

So try, new users, your system to keep
From going completely to hell:
All of our wishes are with you tonight
We hope that it all goes well.

Song 157 Old MacDonald Had A Farm (No. 3)
Old D-ARPA had a net ... T-C-P-I-P
And on this net there were some hosts ... T-C-P-I-P
With a host-host here, and a host-host there,
Here a host, there a host, everywhere a host-host.
Old D-ARPA had a net ... T-C-P-I-P

Old D-ARPA had a net ... T-C-P-I-P
And in this net there were some routes ... T-C-P-I-P
With a route to here and a route to there
Here a route, there a route, everywhere a thru-route.
With a host-host here, and a host-host there,
Here a host, there a host, everywhere a host-host.
Old D-ARPA had a net ... T-C-P-I-P

Old D-ARPA had a net ... T-C-P-I-P
And in this net there was some mail, ... T-C-P-I-P
With an E-mail here and net-note there
Here a note, there a note, everywhere some e-mail.
With a route to here and a route to there
Here a route, there a route, everywhere a thru-route.
With a host-host here, and a host-host there,
Here a host, there a host, everywhere a host-host.
Old D-ARPA had a net ... T-C-P-I-P

Old D-ARPA had a net ... T-C-P-I-P
And UNIX ran this far flung net ... T-C-P-I-P
With a UNIX here, and a XENIX there,
Here a-NIX , there a-NIX, all the sorts of UNIX.
With an E-mail here and net-note there
Here a note, there a note, everywhere some e-mail.
With a route to here and a route to there
Here a route, there a route, everywhere a thru-route.
With a host-host here, and a host-host there,
Here a host, there a host, everywhere a host-host.
Old D-ARPA had a net ... T-C-P-I-P

Old D-ARPA had a net ... T-C-P-I-P
And in this net they had a worm ... T-C-P-I-P
With a worm-worm here, and a worm-worm there
Here a worm, there a worm and,
everywhere some passwords.
With a UNIX here, and a XENIX there,
Here a-NIX , there a-NIX, all the sorts of UNIX.
With an E-mail here and net-note there
Here a note, there a note, everywhere some e-mail.
With a route to here and a route to there
Here a route, there a route, everywhere a thru-route.
With a host-host here, and a host-host there,
Here a host, there a host, everywhere a host-host.

(Take a Breath --- Phewww!)

Old D-ARPA had a net ... T-C-P-I-P

Song 158 Somewhere Over the Rainbow (from the Wizard of Oz)
Somewhere out on my hard disk
Way down low
There's a file that I wrote out
Sometime, quite long ago

Somewhere stored in the file tree
Down so deep
Lies the data I need now
a spreadsheet I have to keep

If grubby little sectors fail
and data's in the garbage pail
I'll cry

When file chains cross like tangled rope
and CHKDSK say's there is no hope
that's when you'll find me

Somewhere back on a mainframe
Safe and sound
Where I/S does the backup
and all my files are found

Somewhere on all those DASDs
there's my place
Where I can share my data
and there is always space.

Song 159 Follow the Yellow Brick Road (from the Wizard of Oz)
Follow the path that your told.
Follow the S-A-A goal.
Follow, follow, follow, follow ...
Into the I-B-M fold.

Follow the rules and
Follow the dreams.
Follows the guideline to format your screens.

Follow, follow, follow everything I-B-M sold.

We're off to OfficeVision
We just left the blizzard of PROFs.
It was, It was a wonderful thing
A wonderfull thing. That's PROFs.

If ever an office system there was
The system of PROFs was one because
because, because, because, because, be-ca---use ...
Because of the wonderfull notes it does.

We're off to OfficeVision
we just left the blizzard of PROFs.

Song 160 How Much is That Doggie in the Window
How big is that system that does win-dows?
The one that they call O-S-2.
How big is the program they call P-M
I hope it fits my P-S-2.

I now have a system that's a screamer.
A four-eighty-six C-P-U.
It runs with twelve megabytes of mem'ry.
And still it won't move O-S-2.

I once had a P-C that was smaller.
An old X-T, six-forty K.
It ran M-S D-O-S and DESQVIEW
And all of my stuff ran O-K.

How much is that system that does win-dows.
From Microsoft and I-B-M.
How much is that system that does win-dows.
And does it help me or serve them??

Song 161 Bicycle Built for Two (No. 3)
chorus
A-D Cy-cle ... Give me your answer true.
We're half crazy for the lack of good tools ... A few.

We don't need a lot of vendors.
We're really not big spenders.
What we would buy from any guy.
Is a 'life-cycle' built for two.

chorus
A-D Cy-cle ... We are confused by you.
Are you CASE or a database that is new?

We don't need another story a-bout Re-pos-i-tory.
We can do great and can 'relate'
To our data in D-B-2.

chorus
I--B--M, Just give us a little clue.
What the heck will all of that software do ??

We can't say we share your visions.
It's tough to make decisions.
When all we see are charts gloss-y.
'Bout a "life cycle" built for two.

Song 162 Don't Fence Me In
Oh give me LANs, lots of LANs, under starry SKYEs above,
Just give me CICS,
Let me write lots of code for the product that I love,
I want my CICS.

On a big mainframe or a little PS/2,
Nothing but CICS will ever do,
There is nothing else in the world for you,
Just give me CICS.

Song 163 Pack Up Your Troubles
Input repository entities and smile, smile, smile.
Enter relationships from A to Z, smiling all the while.
Then you can stop worrying and crank out tools in style.
Oh! Input repository entities and smile, smile, smile.

Model your business using E-A-R, conceptually.
Map down to logical and storage views, with con-sis-ten-cy.
Make your application code from data base be free.
Oh! Model your business using E-A-R, con-cep-tu'lly.

First they were subjects, now they're entities,
tra-la, tra-lee.
Entities are making way for objects now,
in OOPS technology.
I don't really give a damn!,
they're all just "things" to me.
Oh! First they were subjects, now they're entities,
tra-la, tra-lee.

Song 164 Row, Row, Row Your Boat
I-P-L your CEC (say kek)
From one-ninety-one.
Rapidly, Rapidly, Rapidly, Rapidly
System loading's done.

Start, start, start your jobs.
One by one by one.
Manu'lly, Manu'lly, Manu'lly
Batch pro-cessing fun.

Scroll, Scroll, Scroll your lines
Gently up the screen
Visu'lly, Visu'lly, Visu'lly,
Operator's dream.

Mount, mount, mount scratch tapes
Way across the floor
Wearily, Wearily, Wearily, Wearily
Then it calls for more

Crash-ing down it came.
Buck'ling at the knees.
Terribly, Terribly, Terribly, Terribly
This system is diseased.

Print, Print, Print, a dump
Reams of useless stuff
Heavily, heavily, heavily, heavily
Lifting it is tough

Call, call, call for help
Call to I-B-M
Verily, Verily, Verily, Verily
But don't wait for them.

Scan, Scan, Scan, the list
Of one-thousand bugs
PERs, RETs, DOCs, DUPs,
and nine-hundred SUGs.

Read, Read, Read the code
Owned by I-B-M
P-L-S, P-L-S, P-L-S, P-L-S
PLeaSe use A-S-M.

Talk, talk, talk again
Talk to Level-two.
Ha, Ha, Poor slob...
A-PARs are all new.

PUT, PUT, PUT a tape
On your M-V-S.
Hopefully, Hopefully, Hopefully, Hopefully,
This will fix the mess.

I-P-L again,
From your SYSRES pack.
Frightfully, Frightfully, Frightfully, Frightfully
Still the bug comes back.

Fume, fume, fume, on hold.
Wait for Level-one.
Busily,Busily, Busily, Busily.
Getting nothing Done.

Browse, browse, browse, your dump.
Find a program check.
Blearily, Blearily, Blearily, Blearily
Fix it, what the heck!

Build, build, build a zap,
Write your REPs and VERs.
Painfully, Painfully, Painfully, Painfully
I-B-M don't care.

I-P-L again.
The third time is the charm.
Merrily, merrily, merrily, merrily,
No con-sole alarm.

Done, done, done your job.
Please turn out the light.
Happily,Happily, Happily
You'll sleep well tonight.

Song 165 Clementine (No. 2)
In a little town in Europe,
It was back in fifty-nine,
Thirty people came together,
There was G.U.I.D.E., and that's just fine.
chorus
We are G.U.I.D.E. folk, out of Europe,
And we're glad we came this way ...
G.U.I.D.E. and SHARE folks are like-minded,
And what more is there to say!

We all work with I-B-M stuff,
M-V-S or D-B-2,
A-D/Cycle, JES and CICS and,
just remember, hardware, too.
chorus

But we sure are at our best now
with a thing called N-L-S,
Since we cover thirty countries
All with natives, more or less!
chorus

We speak German, French, Italian,
Finnish, Swedish, for a few,
Spanish, Turkish, Greek, and Flemish,
Scottish, Irish, English, too.
chorus

Song 166 'Til We Meet Again
'Round the blazing foil projector's light,
We've been singing HASP-y songs tonight.
Songs of joy, and songs of cheer,
Helped by whiskey, wine and beer: No

Console bells disturb our melody,
While we show that we can sing off-key
Songs that date from M-F-T:
'Till we meet again

All these songs we've sung until we're hoarse
Are dis-trib-u-ted on-ly in source
I-B-M'ers, users, too
SHARE their songs with all the crew, But

Closing time for SCIDS is drawing nigh:
To our friends we'll raise our glasses high:
Toasting each o-ther good-bye
'Till we meet again.

Song 167 Beverly Hillbillies
Come listen to a story 'bout some code called HASP
That ran the O-S jobs so quick it almost made us gasp.
It's His-to-ry is that of big blue
working hand-in-hand
With users to produce a program
known throughout the land

(and it saved big O-S).

It started at the NASA site at Houston when they saw
That M-F-T could not deliver through-put in the raw
With only one partition that was running out steam
And output backing up in queues for printers by the ream.

(and P-C-P was worse!)

And so the IBM'ers there took out their coding pad
And coded up a system that was not a passing fad
This program ran the readers and writers in a pool
And kept the cards and lines on disk
with functions known as SPOOL

 (it ran the console, too).

But I-B-M announced that M-F-T would have to die
And all around the world we heard the users start to cry
That if this came to pass
  that it would leave them feeling blue
And that's when I-B-M announced a HASPy version two

(that's When "haspy days" was written).

To users HASP was something that they could not do without.
It made O-S okay to run; of that there is no doubt
Because the users liked the features, I-B-M. shipped more
And sent out to the field re-leases ...
two and three and four

(and included a lot of user developed features).

When I-B-M. came out with M-V-S they saw the light.
They realized that type-one code just couldn't do it right.
They chose the system that was written by the Houston crew.
Although for some strange reason
they now say it's called JES-2.

(but it still uses the dollar sign).

Even with that funny name JES-2 works very well.
It's got no major bugs in it, as far as we can tell:
Of course there may be hidden gotchas but we'll never know
For I-B-M is changing parts of it to O-C-O

(I don't dare say the line that ought to be here).

And now it's time to say goodbye to all our HASPy kin.
We'd like to thank you one and all for kindly dropping in.
You're all invited back next time to sing a HASPy song.
And join your voice with all us folks as we sing-along.

(Y'all come back now Y'heah ?!)

Song 168 Taps
Day is Done, Jobs to run
In the queue, Still a few
To be done
All is well ?  There's the bell
System dies...

Late at night, Make things right
I-P-L,  All is swell
Jobs in flight...
Get jobs run, by the suns morning light

I-B-M,  SHARE helps them
See the light, Users fight
For what's right
Show you care, 'bout soft-ware
Come to SHARE.

Here at SHARE, SCIDs is there
Sessions run, Work is done
BOFs at night
Singing's done, We.. had fun
Say good-night...

Song 169 The Band Played On
The forecaster said that the rains would be bad
and the storm came near.

'Twas hurricace Bob that was doing the job
Makin pe-ople fear.

The user's were worried and chewing their nails.
'Cause their jobs had to finish by dawn.

With high winds approaching and waters encroaching
the storm came on.

Contingency plans were unearthed from the files
while the rains poured down

But the planned backup site was as dark as the night
on Long Is-land Sound

The U-P-S saved us by feeding the pow'r bus
and keeping it up till the dawn.

Though Bob tried to drown us, With floods all around us
The jobs ran on.

Song 170 Thanks for the Memories
Thanks for the memories
HASP ties that look so great, The Model 88
The raspy voice, the music choice,
and SCIDS which closes late
We thank you so much.

Thanks for the memories
Of HASP pad-locks and keys
The skirt that shows your knees
Of song awards and singing hordes
dressed up in orange Tees
We thank you so much.

Many's the times that you taught us
To thank all the folks that we oughta
And, oh, all the songbooks we boughta
This may not rhyme but for all time...

It's thanks for the memories
We hate to see you go, We wish it weren't so
For 20 years we've sung right here
to tunes we didn't know
So thanks, Chuck, so much.
repeat

Song 171 Silent Night
SystemView...  Are you True ?
I've been wa..aiting. Where are you ?
Lots of discussion.  Not one line of code.
All of this talking has gotten real old.
I've been patient so far.....
I have been patient so far.

SystemView... I need you.
Foils are many. Results are few.
Are you vapor and pie in the sky?
When you're done, do you think it will fly?
I've been patient, thus far.
I have been patient thus far.

SystemView... So, what is new?
I think I will bid you adieu
I-B-M call me when all this is real
Trouble us no more with all of your speils
We've been patient too lo...ong.
We have been patient too long.

Song 172 The Lion Sleeps Tonight
In your system, Your micro-system,
A virus sleeps tonight.

In your P-C, Out on your hard disk
A virus sleeps tonight

chorus
Oh ....... Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh .....
Take it away, Take IT away

Oh ....... Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh .....
Take it away, Take IT away

On that floppy, That "back-up" copy
A virus sleeps tonight

When you copy Infected floppies
The virus spreads its might

chorus
Oh prop-a-gate, Oh prop-a-gate
Oh prop-a-gate, Oh prop-a-gate
Oh prop-a-gate, Oh prop-a-gate
Save it away.

Oh prop-a-gate, Oh prop-a-gate
Oh prop-a-gate, Oh prop-a-gate
Oh prop-a-gate, Oh prop-a-gate
Give it away.

On "Michs" birthday, That is this Friday
That virus springs to life

There is some risk, He'll wipe your hard disk
And make you loose your bytes

A hack-attack, A hack-attack
A hack-attack, A hack-attack
A hack-attack, A hack-attack
May come our way

A hack-attack, A hack-attack
A hack-attack, A hack-attack
A hack-attack, A hack-attack
May come our way

Run a vac-cine, And clean your ma-chine
And you can sleep tonight

Cure that virus, Before it strikes us
And we can make things right

chorus
Oh........, Oh, Oh, Oh, Oh, Oh, Oh,
Just save the day, Just save the day

Oh........, Oh, Oh, Oh, Oh, Oh, Oh,
Just save the day, Just save the day

A Software hack, A code attack
A Software hack, A code attack
A Software hack, A code attack
It comes our way

A Software hack, A code attack
A Software hack, A code attack
A Software hack, A code attack
It worms our way

Song 173 I'm Gettin' Married in the Mornin'
Softcopy is so user friendly
It'll beat paper every time
Readin' is easy, Searchin' is breezy
As long you have books on-line

I gotta read'em in the mornin'
See that the pubs are all on-line
All in-for-mation, From host to workstation
Just get me all the books on time.

With bad old paper-books the copy's hard
But with an on-line book you can go far.

Oh, I-B-M made a big announcement
They're puttin' all their books online
You other vendors, Just don't be big spenders
And get me all your stuff on-line

C-Ds are really pretty nifty
Four hundred books all at one time
No boxes or crates, And no painful updates
I rather have the books on-line

If you print paper, It is REFUSEd
Give me a C-D ROM that I can use.

Oh, Bouncin' around the information
Linkin' and ref'in all the time
Warp hy-pertext space, and move at your own pace
With information all on-line.

Searches can answer all the questions
Just type key-words and you'll find
All pert'nent matches, From ABENDs to patches
We'll find you all the books just fine

If you are lookin' for J-C-L
A a matching phrase is: control cards sent from hell.

Oh, we'll all read on-line in the future
When all the best books are on-line
Throw out you binders, And take off your blinders

Just give us all the books....
Give us all the books...
For.. LANs.. sakes
Give us all the books... On... line....

Song 174 Kids (from Bye Bye Birdie)
REXX!  It is how we make our EXECs today.
REXX!  Throw your J-C-L and C-LISTs away!
REXX!  Is so terrifically flexible and mature.
We can't see why any-body us-es
any other language.

REXX!  Handles bytes and bits - it gives full control.
REXX!  It will make your new appl-ications roll.
Why can't they all support it
 in inte-grated ways?
Build procedures in REXX, today!

repeat

Song 175 Never on Sunday
Oh you can throw away your FORTRAN,
your Ada, your C code, your PL/1 for sure!
Oh you can give up on the vec-tor compilers,
C-plus-plus, and others which endure.
Oh you can send us all your new app-lications tomorrow
and we will code them well.
And they will surely be quite early
and work: you'll be happy!
'Cause we'll use A-P-L!

It looks like Greek ... but it's fun to learn...
And the way you code ... will take quite a turn...

Its tough to type ... Uses nine shift keys...
But if you do math ... It makes it a breeze...

So tomorrow we will rework your spec-if-i-cations
to rank ten tensor kinds,
And we will set them up to Invert and Transpose and
Grade Down and all in just one line!
Then you can run them on your mainframe,
your P-C, your RISC box no-one will ever tell,
The way we got the whole thing to work,
and so quickly, was using A-P-L!
Song 176 Jingle Bells (No. 2)
Dashing to the Field, The Marketeers, Oh gosh,
Are racing to beat MicroSoft and Apple MacIntosh;
Demos in the one hand,
Pamphlets in the other,
If she wasn't paying you, you'd give away your Mother.
chorus
Oh, Off you go, off you go
Raising spirits high!
Saying you'll deliver This
And promising the sky!

A month or so ago, I thought I saw them leave
To listen to the customers ideas I do believe
Some ideas were good, Some were not so hot
They all were promised anyway
and now were on the spot
chorus

Song 177 Scarlet Ribbons
I went in to Reg-is-tra-tion
There I got my badge and book
Then I went to get my ribbon
For a special one I looked

All the folks at reg-is-tra-tion
Didn't know of what I spoke
An "Alliance" Installation
Is this some strange kind of joke

Through the box the clerk was raking
Just no ribbons for the taking

Fin'lly now at SHARE head-quaters
In a box beneath the desk
Was a ribbon, Hot Pink Ribbon
And the object of my quest

Some time be-fore the next SHARE meet
I have on-ly one request
Change the color of that ribbon
Hot pink ribbon on my chest

Song 178 Beverly Hillbillies (No. 2)
Let me tell you all a story about M-V-S
As oper-ating systems go it clearly is the best
Then one day  Gartner said the mainframes dead!
Everyone then sold their stock ... bought Microsoft instead.

Well I am here to tell you that it simply isn't true
M-V-S will live and grow and work for me and you
And this is why I feel so sure it's certainly no lie.
MVS Development is run by folks like Guy.

So now it's time to say goodby and so I'll end this song
When someone says the mainframes dead
Just tell 'em why they're wrong
For Gartner and ComputerWorld will soon be eating crow
Just wait 'til later on this year ... We'll say I told you so !!

Song 179 Tie A Yellow Ribbon Round the Old Oak Tree
I'm coming home I've been at SHARE
They've made decisions while I wasn't there
And now I hear that M-V-S might get the budget axe
They told me that they'd let me know. After I got back
I hope ... I don't get sacked.
chorus
Tie a yellow ribbon round my three ninety
Runnin' M-V-S is the life for me
If I don't see a ribbon round my three ninety
I'll be such a jerk, lookin' for work - In this econ-o-my
If I don't see a yellow ribbon round my three ninety

Lou Ger-st-ner, please look for me
Cause I couldn't bear to see what I might see
I really can't stand UNIX and I hate Windows N-T
Why are we out looking for a new technology
I hope they hear my plea

chorus

Now my whole darn group is cheerin' and I can't believe I see
A hundred yellow ribbons round my three -
my three ninety

Song 180 Funiculi, Funicula
Some think ...
that CICS (say kicks) is not for alteration
But oh, Not I -- But oh, Not I
Some think ...
the source has more than ample function.
No need to mod. No need to mod.

But I ...
I spend my time in micro fiching
The bits and bytes, the bits and bytes
To zap.  ...
the source with just a small extension
Did I do wrong? Did I do wrong?

chorus
Oh dear, oh my. Level 2 is sad
Oh dear, oh my, now they're even mad.
I made a mod, he made a mod
She made a mod, they made a mod
CICS (say kicks) is everywhere
We have the source, we made a mod

Song 181 Piano Man
It's eight o'clock on a Mon..day,
The programming crowd staggers in,
There's a user by my term-inal,
With drool running off of his chin.
He says, "Son, can you code me some processing,
I'm not really sure what I need,
But it's short and it's sweet and it's NP-complete
And it has to be finished with speed."
chorus
They say, "Write us some code, you're the DP man,
Write us some code today,
'Cause we need this report for the CEO,
And he wants it by yesterday."

Now, Tim at the console's a friend of mine,
He bumps up my pri-o-rity,
And he'll bum me a smoke
and some Twinkies and Coke,
But there's someplace that he'd rather be.
He said, "Paul, I believe it's a dead-end here,"
As the smile ran away from his face,
"But I'm sure I could find work with I-B-M,
If I could get out of this place."
chorus

Now, Mark is a frustrated racing man,
Whose license is riding on luck,
And he's talking with Jeff who scares modpeds to death,
With those forty-inch tires on his truck.
Well, it's pretty good code for a Monday,
And my team leader gives me a smirk,
'Cause he knows that it's me they'll be coming to see,
When they find out that it didn't work.
chorus

And the keyboard, it clicks like a tickertape
And the CRT screams like a jet,
And they walk by my cube and throw pens at my tube,
And say, "Man, ain't they fixed that thing yet?"
And the old hands are screaming to standardize,
As the patches and kludges pile up,
'Cause this place is a hacker's own paradise:
It's a string-handlin'-in-FORTRAN-shop.
chorus

Song 182 California Girls
Well MicroSoft has Windows, it's a GUI for today
From the Novell clan we have Netware LANs
and I guess it runs O-K
The folks for Bell Labs gave us UNIX
it might fit your plans
But as for me ... You can have my P-C
I'll run the best O-S I can
chorus
I wish they all could be just like M-V
I wish they all could be just like M-V
I wish they all could be just like M-V-S

Well MicroSoft will tell you Windows'
gonna rule the world
When they ship N.T. whenever that might be
then you can watch their plans unfurl
But all I really want from them's
my data back in place.
I tried to use DOS 6 before they made a fix
and I typed in Double-space
chorus

The tabloids tell you 'OPEN' is the only way to go
And Novell's there with UNIX-ware
to keep you hip and in the know
But let me tell you now
You can have cake and eat it too
With good ol'  M-V-S ya' can have all the best
you can be open with JES2.
chorus

The press treats our old M-V-S
Just like they treated Bush.
They haven't got a clue but we all know it's true
that UNIX systems are just mush.
And then the rags will tell you
That another might be best
But when you think it through
you'll stay with with old big blue ...
and you will run on M-V-S
chorus

Song 183 Cheers
Runnin' with hosts an LANs and P-Cs
Sure does make things tough
Wouldn't you like to return to when ...
One system was enough
And.. punched cards were all the the rage

Sometimes ... you gotta go ...
where everybody knows main-frames
When your memory didn't page
You gotta go where people know
That systems are all the same
You gotta go where everybody knows mainframes.

Pickin' your way through the Inter-net
You really need a map
Loggin' into a dozen servers seems just like a trap
Shouldn't we blow it all away ?

Sometimes ... you gotta go ...
Where everybody knows main-frames
Where one logon lasts all day
You gotta go where people know
That networks are all the same
You gotta go where everybody knows mainframes.

Gettin' in touch with the world of objects
Now were learnin' OOPS
Back in the good old days
we wrote with IFs and DOs and loops
Couldn't you use an old array.....

Sometimes ... you wanna go
Where everybody knows main-frames
J-C-L was still a pain
You gotta go where people know
Programmings' all the same
You gotta go where everybody knows mainframes.

Keepin' a job in this crazy world
Takes everything you know
Choosing the right from the wrong direction
Which way should you go ?
I-B-M's in disarray !

Sometimes... you wanna go...
Where everybody knows main-frames
M-V-S and V-M reign
You gotta go where people know
Systems are all the same
You gotta go where everybody knows mainframes.

Comin' to SHARE you get information
That might save your day
Hearin' we're all in this situation
Makes it seem O-K
Wouldn't... you like to get away

Sometimes... you gotta go
Where everybody knows main-frames
SHARE and GUIDE are still the names
You gotta go where people know
That problems all the same
You gotta go where everybody knows mainframes.

You gotta go where friends all know
Our troubles are all the same
Here at SHARE everybody knows your name.

Song 184 50 Ways To Leave Your Lover
I hear them talking round
the terminal one night
They were working on a problem
and they couldn't get it right.
Then someone said,
"Hey guys although it may seem kinda trite"

There must be
 fifty ways to close and APAR.

They turned and asked him.
"What exactly do you mean?"
He said,
"First you really have to understand the service scene.
But, if you'll let me,
I'll be glad to intervene
And show ya
Fifty ways to close an APAR
Fifty ways to close and APAR

Call it a DOC, Jock
User made a mistake, Jake.
Say it's RACF's fault, Walt.
and get yourself free.
Make it a SUG, Doug.
It aint really a JES bug.
Then take a month's leave, Steve
and get youself free.

He said,
"Now listen very carefully to me
It's a waste of time to fix'um;
They'll only go P-E.
So why not just apply this simple remedy,

They all returned to work
with cries of childish glee
And they quickly dropped the back log
from two-hundred down to three.
Which only goes to show
just how simple life can be
When you know
Fifty ways to close an APAR
Fifty ways to close an APAR.

Make it a WAD, Rod
Call it a DUP, Rube
Tell a little white lie, Cy,
Say it won't reproduce, Bruce,
Then resign from the firm, Herm,
and get yourself free.

Song 185 The City of New Orleans
Third shift in the old computer center
Changing trains on a fourteen-oh-three
Console clatters out a setup message
Cards are punching out in stacker three

And the disks drive keep a seeking
and the tapes are spinning too
They make the music of computing seem so true
Oper-a-tor sings this song again
The users they will please refain
We all got the disappearing mainframe blues.

And I'm singin'
Good mornin' America, how are you?
Don't ya' know me
I'm your native son
I am the system called the I-B-M three-sixty
And I have run five hundred jobs
til' the day is done

M-V-S, V-S-1, DOS, and V-M, O-S, A-C-P, and T-S-S,
T-CAM, I-M-S, and CICS and V-TAM
HASP and ASP and R-J-E and JES

And the sons of system programmers
and of software engineers.
They run their fathers code
the software made of dre-e-eams
All the people here I-B-M and GUIDE
and SEAs and SHARE
are the members of a global programming team

And I'm singing
Good day' America, how are you?
Don't ya' know me
I'm your native son
I am the system called the I-B-M three-sixty
and I can run a thousand trans in second, one.

Now they say the mainframe is a goner
P-C, LANs and Servers rule the day
We all want dis-tributed computing
Open systems are a better way.

But the networks are a chokin' As connections multi-ply
And our servers now can't handle all the mail
And I long for days of yesterday
With my model ninety five
and my non-stop M-V-S that never did fail.

And I'm singing
Hello America, how are you?
Don't ya' know me
I'm your native son
Yes I'm the system called the I-B-M three-sixty
and I can handle your request from sun to sun.

Mainframes really can be super servers
MIPs, I-O, disk space and mem-o-ry
More resource than you can shake a stick at
Enough for all the work and you and me

They're the best communicators
With thier fast I-O and speed
In our systems
They can really make things go..oh.. oh..

They can manage lots and lots stuff
When a work-station just ain't enough
They are the engine that permits computin' to grow

And I'm singing
Hello America, How are ya ?
You still need me..
My job's not yet done
I am the mainframe
Called the System thirty-ninety
and I'll be stayin' 'round awhile
makin' business  run.

Yes....
 Hello America, How are ya ?
You still need me
My job ins't done!
I am the mainframe
Called the System thirty-ninety
And I'll be stayin' 'round awhile
makin' business  run.

Song 186 Climb Every Mountain
Stuff every mailbox, Count every chair,
Schedule all the sessions,
Publish stuff for SHARE.

Field ev'ry question, Dup ev'ry sheet,
Always keep on smiling....
Oh, my aching feet!

We're S-B-A staff,
Trying hard to succeed,
We all love our jobs,
But it's help that we need.......

Help all the SHAREfolk
Tune every scheme,
Run to ev'ry meeting
Yes, we're on your team!

Song 187 I'm Leaving on a Jet Plane
All my files are zipped, I'm ready to go
My code is off of T-S-O
My jobs they are all done and I am set

I have learned to write in C plus plus
I've made the change without a fuss
But I'll miss the things like I-M-S and JES
chorus
So CICS me and SPOOL for me
Tell me that you'll WAIT for me
Tell me about ABENDs that I know

I'm gettin' off the mainframe
Don't think that I'll be back again
Makes me sad to relearn all I know

There's a new workstation at my desk
a RISC machine with A-I-X
A sys-tem that's so fast it seems to fly

With a meg-a-pel graph-ic display
A gig of disk, and a DAT tape
It's hard for me to think that it's all mine.
chorus
But, CICS me and SPOOL for me
Tell me a-bout three-sixty
Sing to me of BAL and J-C-L

I'm gettin' off the mainframe
Don't think that I'll be back again
Makes me sad to relearn all I know

I am on the LAN and better yet
I'm gateway'ed to the Internet
The info-super-highway's really neat

With USENET groups and WorldWide Web
and Archie, Go-pher and TELNET
I seem to have a global data reach
chorus
But, CICS me and SPOOL for me
Tell me that you'll WAIT for me
Sing to me of V-TAM / S-N-A

I'm gettin' off the mainframe
Don't think that I'll be back again
Makes me sad to relearn all I know

Now the song we've sung
Is almost done
We've had our say and poked some fun
We told the story that we had to tell

We will think about the days gone by
And lessons learned, That we'll apply
But it makes us feel so sad that we could cry.
chorus
So GUIDE me and SHARE for me
Walk with me through history
Tell me that you'll never really go

We're gettin' off the mainframe
But lookin' back it's all the same
Really never lose the stuff we know
Song 188 Amazing Grace (No. 2)
Amazing Gates, of Mic-ro-soft
A rich computer nerd
The most suc-cess-ful pro-grammer
Around the world he's heard

The Al-tair BASIC that he wrote,
The M-S DOS he bought,
And Windows concepts that he stole
An in-dus-try has wrought

Amazing Gates, of Mic-ro-soft
Is not content with greed
He wants to turn his Windows code
To every hu-man need.

On toast-ers, phones, and micro-waves
On toilets, and T-Vs,
He wants to put an inter-face
To make your world gooeee (GUI).

Amazing Gates, of Mic-ro-soft
His vision deep and broad
"Computing at your fingertips"
More BILLions will he hoard?

Song 189 Yesterday (No. 4)
Leg-a-cy ... What an awful thing to la-bel me
Sounds as ancient as three-seventy
Oh, please don't call me Leg-a-cy

Pow'r-fully ... Big-iron crunches numbers easily
All those little boxes bother me
Oh, Leg-a-cy is just not me
chorus
You won't hear my name when computer gurus speak...
You won't read about me in Forbes or Business We-ee-ee-ek

Wait and see ... You'll find out that it's not gonna be
Quite that easy to get rid of me
So please don't call me Leg-a-cy

Don't forget your Leg-a-cy

Song 190 CICS Medley (No. 1)
verse (America the Beautiful)
Oh bountiful CICS Fam-i-ly
For all the platforms run
For M-V-S, and V-S-E
And all the bloody fun

CICS Fam-i-ly, CICS Fam-i-ly
Ben shed his light on thee
With M-R-O, And I-S-C
From Ben to you and me
verse (My Bonnie Lies Over the Ocean)
My system now runs on an H-P
My system now runs on N-T
My system now runs on an Apple
Oh, please clone a system for me

Clone CICS, clone CICS
Oh, please clone a system for me, for me
Clone CICS, clone CICS
Oh, please clone a system for me
verse (Clementine)
In a window, on my desktop
Runs some code which is brand new
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS on O-S-2

On a dis-play, to the mainframe
Access-ing my I-M-S
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS on M-V-S

Function shipping, and some routing
Simply using I-S-C
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS on V-S-E

It's a sure bet, using TELNET
For a log in to U-NIX
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS on A-I-X

On an N-T, on an Apple
On about just everything
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS of which I sing
verse (Four Leaf Clover)
I have been under a D-C blunder.
That I should have seen before.
It chews up storage and cycles galore.
It is archaic. I've showed it the door.

No need RETAINing, We are retraining
With products I now adore
I'll be in clover with CICS all over
Where I should have been before
verse (Jingle Bells)
Plowing through a dump with a T-S-O display
O'er the blocks we go, Sighing all the way
Bells on mainframes ring, Making beepers light
What fun it is to restart CICS
With X-R-F tonight

O-C-1, O-C-4, ABEND all the way
Oh what fun it is to dump
In a C-I-C-S way (Hey!)

O-C-1, O-C-4, ABEND all the way
Oh what fun it is to dump
In a C-I-C-S way !!

Song 191 Lying Eyes
CIOs don't seem to find out early
How to tell what's fake and what is fact
Another vendor in to tell their story
I cross my fingers my  boss won't react

Late that day they pitched their client server
I guess every mainframe shop has heard before
but the  sales guy he is speaking with such furvor
The deal is signed before he's out the door

So they wheel in fifty servers and installed them
replacing IMS and DB2
but with training and support and all the problems
all the headaches made us wish we had stayed blue
chorus
You can't hide your vendor lies
We don't care bout' your alibies
Response time sucks, our users cry
There ain't no way to hide your vendor lies

On the other side of town a shop has waited
They knew that M.V.S. just wasn't done
A brand new CMOS mainframe they have slated
At half the cost of what they used to run

My, oh my, we sure knew how to arrange things
Did we really think that MVS was dead
and it comes time that we now have to explain things
To the CEO who wants my bosses head
chorus

Song 192 Oh Tannenbaum
Oh Micro-soft, Oh Micro-soft
We wait and how we wonder
If Windows Ninety-Five is real?
Or just Bill Gates' blunder

We hear it still runs over DOS
If that is true don't bother us
With U-P-Fs and all that mess
We will stay true to O-S-2

Oh, I-B-M, Oh I-B-M,
Your WARP's a window breaker
It runs my appl-i-cations fast

It multi-tasks with style and grace
It run in lots less mem'ry space
Oh I-B-M, Oh I-B-M
You're finally in the O-S race.
repeat

Song 193 Do You Know Where You're Going To (Theme from Mahogany)
chorus
Do you know, who you're buying from?
Do you know from where your tech support will come?
Who are you buying from?
Do you know...

Did you get, what you're hoping for?
Was your vendor there when cash went out your door ?
Or was support real poor?
Do you  know...

Once we bought OPS from M-S-I
It was the best software that money could buy
And our rep said the company... would not be sold
Exactly two days before purchased by Goal!
chorus

Now two years passed and we were pleased
We bought mpre products and support never eased
Ans our rep told us again, Goal's not for sale
But that was two day before the Legent deal
chorus

Now three years passed and all I see
From legent is this thing they call X-P-E
They said it would save my shop, at least someday
That day won't come since since they've been bought by C-A
chorus

Song 194 She's A Grand Old Flag
She's a grand old SHARE
High tech-nol-ogy fair
And for-ever remember her name
She's got coverage of
the stuff we love
from P-Cs to super-mainframes
And you know it's true
We are helping big blue
Over bumpy and rough ter-rain
Should old three-sixty be forgotten
Keep your eye on that grand old SHARE.

She's a grand old SHARE
still got style, grace and flair
Though she's now over forty years old
'Bout hard and soft-ware
Ideas we SHARE
Solutions, and fixes, and code.
When you come to SHARE
you will meet people there
who can help you and SHARE your load
Should all that FORTRAN be forgotten ?
That was written by grand old SHARE ?

She's a grand old SHARE
She's been 'round forty years
She's the place all us techies belong
In the east and west
SHARE is the best
With sessions, BOFs, SCIDs and with songs
Everyone must know
Though the change winds must blow
That she'll weather the gales and storms
In all this stormy sea of changes
Just keep comin' to grand old SHARE.

Song 195 It's My CICS on Everything (Clementine)
In a window, on my desktop
Runs some code which is brand new
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS (say "KICKS") on O-S-2

On a display, to the mainframe
Accessing my I-M-S
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS on M-V-S

Function shipping, and some routing
Simply using I-S-C
It's a client, It's a server
It's my CICS on V-S-E

It's a sure bet, using TELNET
For a log in to U-NIX
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS on A-I-X

On an N-T, on an Apple
On just about ev'rything
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS of which I sing

Song 196 Hursley, England Has A Plan (Old MacDonald Had a Farm)
chorus
Hursley, England has a plan
CICS (say "KICKs") for everyone

And in the plan there's M-V-S
CICS for everyone
With a JES spool here
And a JES spool there
Here a pool, There a fool
Everywhere a JES spool
chorus

And in this plan there's V-S-E
CICS for everyone
With a POW-ER here
And a POW-ER there
Here a queue, There a queue
Everywhere a mis-cue
chorus

And in this plan there's O-S-2
CICS for everyone
With a Client here
And a Server there
Here a tube, There a tube
Everywhere a boob tube
chorus

And in this plan there's CICS-SIX-KAY
CICS for everyone
With a UNIX here
And a Motif there
Here a root, There a grep
Everywhere a mis-step
chorus

And in this plan there's FOUR-OH-OH
CICS for everyone
With a CICS shell here
And a batch shell there
Here a shell, There a shell
Everywhere is pell mell
chorus

Song 197 Twelve Bugs of Christmas (Twelve Days of Christmas)
For the first bug of Christmas,
my Sup-er said to me,
"See if they can do it again."

For the second bug of Christmas,
my Sup-er said to me,
"Ask them how they did it,
And See if they can do it again."

For the third bug of Christmas,
my Sup-er said to me,
"Try to reproduce it,
Ask them how they did it,
And See if they can do it again."

For the fourth bug of Christmas,
my Sup-er said to me,
"Run with the debugger,
Try to reproduce it,
Ask them how they did it,
And See if they can do it again."

For the fifth bug of Christmas,
my Sup-er said to me,

"ASK FOR A DUMP,

Run with the debugger,
Try to reproduce it,
Ask them how they did it,
And See if they can do it again."

For the sixth bug of Christmas,
my Sup-er said to me,
"Reinstall the software,

ASK FOR A DUMP,

Run with the debugger,
Try to reproduce it,
Ask them how they did it,
And See if they can do it again."

For the seventh bug of Christmas,
my Sup-er said to me,

"Say they need an upgrade,
Reinstall the software,

ASK FOR A DUMP,

Run with the debugger,
Try to reproduce it,
Ask them how they did it,
And See if they can do it again."

For the twelfth bug of Christmas,
my Sup-er said to me,

"Tell them it's a feature,
Say it's not supported,
Change the documentation,
Blame it on the hardware,
Find a way around it,
Say they need an upgrade,
Reinstall the software,

ASK FOR A DUMP,

Run with the debugger,
Try to reproduce it,
Ask them how they did it,
And See if they can do it again."

Song 198 CICS the Bountiful (America the Beautiful)
Oh bountiful
CICS (say "KICKs") family
For all the platforms served

For M-V-S
And V-S-E
And all the bloody rest

CICS family, CICS family
Ben shed his light on the thee
With M-R-O, And I-S-C
From Ben to you and me

Song 199 Bye Bye Source Code (Bye Bye Blackbird)
Pack up all my zaps and mods
Here I go, O-C-O
Bye, Bye, source code

When the CICS code's gone from me
I can't path, don't you see
Bye, Bye, source code

No one here can share a mod
to please me
Oh what clever mods they use
to tease me

Make a zap and abend CICS
I'll survive with some tricks
Bye, Bye, source code

Song 200 I Have a CICS, You Have a CICS (Funiculi, Funicula)
Some think ...
that CICS (say "KICKs") is not an open system
But oh, not I - But oh, not I

Some think ...
that CICS (say "KICKs") is  almost near extinction
No room to grow, no room to grow

But I, I spend my time installing CICS-es
On V-S-E, and E-S-A

And now, the family has a big expansion
To O-S-2, and A-I-X

Oh dear, oh my, I-M-S is sad
Oh dear, oh my, now they're even mad

I have a CICS (say "KICKs"),  he has a CICS
She has a CICS, they have a CICS

CICS (say "KICKs") is everywhere
No need to guess, we have the best

Song 201 Achy Breaky Heart
chorus
You can take the year, And you can show no fear
You can take the year and add just one.
But if its 99, An error you might find
It just might ru-in all that you have done.

Things written long ago, Have logic that might blow
If you don't control the time and date.
Two digit years seemed bright, Ten years ago tonight
But little did we know we'd sealed our fate.
chorus

If you don't correct, The century defect
A moving van is coming to your door.
'Cause if the programs fail , And cause a paper trail
Employments not an option any more.

IBM will teach, That it is in our reach
To fix up each computer by that day
But still we have the need, To work at super speed
And make our programs work so we can say ...
chorus

Song 202 Zip a - dee doo - dah
Zip  a - dee doo - dah, Zip  a - dee - ay
No more SYSGENs to ruin my day.
Virtual DASD, Virtual Tape
Virtual paycheck, I can not wait

M-V-S now comes on C-D
It is a fact! Believe me!
Why do we need S-M-P-E

Zip  a - dee doo - dah, Zip  a - dee - ay
Where's the next C-D, to brighten my day.

Song 203 Yesterday (No. 5)
Yesterday,
All those backups seemed a waste of pay.
Now my database has gone away.
Oh I believe in yesterday.

Suddenly,
There's not half the files there used to be,
There's a millstone hanging over me
The system crashed so suddenly.

I pushed something wrong
What it was I could not say.

Now my data's gone
and I long for yesterday-ay-ay-ay.

Yesterday,
Need for back-ups seemed so far away.
Thought my data was all here to stay,
Now I believe in yesterday.

Song 204 I Have Been Under a DC Blunder (Four Leaf Clover)
I have been under a D-C blunder
That I should have seen before

It chews up storage and cycles galore
It is archaic, I gave it the door

No need retaining
We need re-training
With products I now adore

I'll be in clover
with CICS (say "KICKs") all over
where I should have been before

Song 205 On Top of 2000 (On Top of Ol Smokey)
chorus
On top of two thou-sand
Is where we should be,
but test-ing won't hap-pen
In this cen-tu-ry.

Our two thou-sand pro-ject
Has planned for two years,
The re-sourc-es need-ed
Have height-ened our fears.

They need their own L-PAR
For set-ting the date
And staff to sup-port it
But they'll have to wait.

We can't find con-tract-ors
Com-Plete, A-DA-BAS,
Who know how to build it
So we rest our case.
chorus

Song 206 Gilligans Island
Just sit right back and you'll hear a tale
Of the doom that is our fate.
That start-ed when pro-grammers used
Two di-gits for a date.
Two di-gits for a date.

Main mem'ry was smal-ler then;
Hard disks were smal-ler, too.
"Four digits are ex-trav-a-gant,
So, let's get by with two.
So, let's get by with two."

"This works through 1999,"
The pro-gram-mers did say.
"Unless we re-write be-fore that
It all will go a-way.
It all will go a-way."

Now when 2000 rolls a-round
It all goes straight to hell,
For zero's less than nine-ty-nine,
As an-y-one can tell.
As an-y-one can tell.

The mail won't bring your pen-sion check
It won't be sent to you
When you're no long-er sixty-eight,
But mi-nus thir-ty-two.
But mi-nus thir-ty-two.

Eight thou-sand years from now I hope
That things weren't left too late,
And people aren't then la-men-ting
Four di-gits for a date.
Four di-gits for a date.

Song 207 Write in C (Let it Be)
When I find my code in tons of trouble,
Friends and colleagues come to me,
Speaking words of wisdom:
"Write in C."

As the deadline fast approaches,
And bugs are all that I can see,
Somewhere, someone whispers:
"Write in C."

Write in C, Write in C,
Write in C, oh, Write in C.
LOGO's dead and buried,
Write in C.

I used to write a lot of FORTRAN,
For science it worked flawlessly.
Try using it for graphics!
Write in C.

If you've just spent nearly 30 hours,
Debugging some assembly,
Soon you will be glad to
Write in C.

Write in C, Write in C,
Write in C, yeah, Write in C.
Basic's not the answer.
Write in C.

Write in C, Write in C,
Write in C, oh, Write in C.
Pascal won't quite cut it.
Write in C.

Song 208 Hey Jude
JES-3 you make me glad.
You take my systems and make them better.
The minute I put your features in
then you begin to make it better.

JES-3 you're still the prize.
For the sysplex you are the model.
You give me a single point-of control,
single sysplex view.  Oh, nothing is better.

Your G-M-S and M-D-S plus D-J-C
gives me the best workflow functionality.
You share my tape, setup my jobs, and merge my logs.
You manage it all so painlessly.

Na Na Na Na Na ... Na Na Na Na

JES-3 you run so fast.
Your spool performance is unsurpassed.
You let me plug in my code with ease
through your DSPs.  Oh, nothing is better.

You boldly schedule all my jobs, control the "hogs;"
event-driven multi-systems management.
With smart initiators too!  JES3 you're cool!
Two hundred and fifty-five job classes.

Na Na Na Na Na ... Na Na Na Na ... yeah.

JES-3 you make me glad.
You take my systems and make them better.
The minute I put your features in
then you begin to make it better, better, better,
better, better, better, yeah.

Na Na Na Na Na Na Na ...
Na Na Na Na ... JES-3

Na Na Na Na Na Na Na ...
Na Na Na Na ... JES-3

Song 209 Auld Lang Syne (No. 3)
Should nineteen hundreds be forgot?
 -- Y2K a care no more?
Thanks Sys Progs and App'l folks;
You got us through this war.

Your shop is humming right along;
No bugs are left to squash.
Two thousand came, and now it's gone
And we're feelin' rather "posh."

You didn't think you'd get rewards,
Not with project over-spends.
But you've still got a com-pan-y
That employs you and your friends.

Your partners and suppliers, too
Are all alive as well.
But some of your com-pet-i-tors
Have gone right straight to ..@#$l.

So, lift a toast to SHARE my lads;
You have joined us here today.
'Cause when that feared mid-night arrives
You'll again be in the fray.

Our thanks to Marilyn of EDGE
And a thanks to Carl too.
With seminars and sessions long
They taught us all they knew.

A final thought, as we wind down,
And the skirt is laid to rest,
Let Rannie know he did his part;
And it surely was his best!

So, Y2K you took your toll,
And the stress was really keen.
I toast to you, you mean ol' grinch,
And laugh to end this scene!

(Slow, with tearful feeling now and glasses raised high!)

I TOAST TO YOU, you mean ol' grinch,
And LAUGH to end this scene

Song 210 California, Here I Come (No. 3)

California, one more time
We're going back to Anaheim
We're flyin', we're drivin', any old way
We're comin', cause by then
There'll be no more Y2K, so

Sign up soon 'cause if you wait
You'll be Jolly Roger bait
Bring a friend and don't be late
California, here we come
California -- here -- we -- come

Song 211 Auld Lang Syne (Traditional)

Should auld acquaintance be forgot
and never brought to mind?
Should auld acquaintance be forgot
and days of auld lang syne?
chorus
For auld lang syne, my dear
For auld lang syne
We'll tak' a cup o'kindness yet
For auld lang syne.
chorus

Song 212 MTA (No. 3)

I was sittin' at my PC
Workin' on a problem
I was tearing out all my hair
When a great idea came to me
I can beat this problem
With the stuff that I got at Share
chorus
And so I'll always return
'cause I know that I'll learn
What I need to earn my pay
I have got my ticket
And I'm going to Boston
SHARE is there to save my day!

Now I'm running off to sessions
And I'm volunteering
And I'm having myself a ball
I have been a lotta places
And I'm here to tell ya'
Share is truly the best of all
chorus

Song 213 We've Only Just Begun

We've only just begun to SHARE
So many days ahead
We grab our grids and begin to run

We have our lunches on the fly
Hot dogs and candy bars
A beer at SCIDS and our supper's done
Ah yes, we've just begun

Sharing successes and experience
Finding new friends along the way
Hearing suggestions, gripes and compliments
Working together day by day
Together, forever

And when the evening comes we die
So little sleep ahead
We'll start again with the morning sun
Ah yes, we've just begun
Ah yes, we've just begun
Yes Share has just begun

Song 214 California, Here I Come (No. 4)
California, one more time
But it won't be Anaheim
We're flyin', we're drivin', any old way
We're comin', but this time
We'll be headin' for the Beach, so

Sign up soon 'cause if you wait
You'll be Jolly Roger bait
Bring a friend and don't be late
California, here we come
California -- here -- we -- come

Song 215 My Country 'Tis of Thee (No. 4)
.by Anne Peticolas (VET)

OMVS is here, and we can run WebSphere,
Oh I forgot, -
You call it USS, changed names again I guess,
We'll have shared HFS, Or maybe not.

Irish commands we sing, onetstat and oping,
Sometimes I cry.
Can it be Unix now, sometimes I wonder how,
Oedit and obrowse; give me v-i.

Oh what hath Hursley wrought? who would have ever thought
That we would see
IBM in Java's thrall, go get that big tarball,
And how doth it install? - S-M-P slash E!

Something old and something new, something borrowed, something blue;
It's a strange mix.
It's 'twixt and in between, mainframe and PC scene;
Yes, you can use a Java bean, To get to CICS.

Song 216 Winter Wonderland
.by 'Unknown'

Doorbell rings, I'm not list'nin',
From my mouth, drool is glist'nin'
I'm happy-although, My boss let me go-
Happily addicted to the Web.

All night long, I sit clicking,
Unaware time is ticking,
There's beard on my cheek,
Same clothes for a week,
Happily addicted to the Web!

Friends come by; they shake me,
Saying, "Yo, man!
Don't you know tonight's the senior prom?"
With a listless shrug, I just say "No, man;
I just discovered laugh-a-lot-dot-com!"

I don't phone, don't send faxes,
Don't go out, don't pay taxes,
Who cares if someday They drag me away?
I'm happily addicted to the Web!
Happ-ilyyyyy, ad-dict-eeeed to the Weeeeeb!!!
(Yeah!)

Song 217 She's A Grand Old Flag (No. 2)
.by 'Charlie Lyman'

You're grand old SHARE, High tech-nol-ogy fair
We'll for-ever remember your name
You've got coverage of the stuff we love
from P-Cs to super-mainframes
And we know it's true, We are helping BIG BLUE
Turn out products without compare
Should old three-sixty be forgot
Keep your eye on that grand old SHARE.

You're a grand old SHARE, still got style, grace and flair
You're the place all us techies belong
In the east and west, SHARE is the best
With sessions and BOFs, SCIDs and songs
At each SHARE it's true, you will find people who
will assist you, they're folks who care
Should C and FORTRAN be forgot
Keep your eye on that grand old Share.

Song 218 It's My CICS on Everything (Clementine)
.by 'Charlie Lyman Modification'

In a window, on my desktop
Runs some code that's really fun
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS upon a SUN

On a display, to the mainframe
Accessing my I-M-S
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS on M-V-S

Function shipping, and some routing
Simply using I-S-C
It's a client, It's a server
It's my CICS on V-S-E

It's a sure bet, using TELNET
For a log in to U-NIX
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS on A-I-X

On an N-T, on an Apple
On just about ev'rything
It's a client, it's a server
It's my CICS of which I sing



Alphabetic Song Index                                "Page Number"

50 Ways To Leave Your Lover                                   103
A Chorus Line                                                  65
Achy Breaky Heart                                             115
All in Family Theme                                            57
Alphabet Song                                                  22
Amazing Grace                                              1, 107
America The Beautiful                                     19, 114
American SPOOLER Trilogy                                       66
Auld Lang Syne                                    1, 83, 120, 121
Band Played On                                                 94
Battle Hymn of the Republic                                 1, 48
Beverly Hillbillies                                        92, 99
Bicycle Built for Two                                   2, 19, 89
Big D                                                          29
Bloody Mary is the Girl I Love                                 43
Blowin' In The Wind                                             3
Boney Fingers                                                  50
Bowery                                                         44
Brady Bunch                                                    81
Bye Bye Blackbird                                             115
Bye Bye Love                                                    3
Bye Source Code                                               115
California Girls                                              101
California, Here I Come                            2, 4, 120, 122
Canadian Railroad Trilogy                                      66
Car 54 Where Are You ?                                         48
Cheers                                                        102
Christmas Song                                                  4
CICS Medley                                                   108
CICS the Bountiful                                            114
City of New Orleans                                           104
Clementine                                       26, 91, 112, 123
Climb Every Mountain                                          106
Daring Young Men on the Flying Trapeze                         83
Ding Dong the Witch is Dead                                    86
Dixie                                                          85
Do You Know Where You're Going To                             110
Don't Fence Me In                                              89
Down by the Old Mill Stream                                    26
Ever Onward, IBM                                               23
Exodus                                                         28
Far Above Cayuga's Waters                                      30
Farmer and the Cowman Should be Friends                        64
Follow the Yellow Brick Road                                   88
Four Leaf Clover                                          22, 116
Funiculi, Funicula                                       100, 115
George M. Cohan Medley                                         74
Ghost Riders in the Sky                                        29
Gilligans Island                                              118
God Bless America                                              40
God Save The Queen                                              9
Goodnight Irene                                                24
Greensleeves                                                   41
Happy Birthday to You                                          68
Happy Wanderer                                             53, 81
Has Anybody Seen My Gal?                                       33
HASP Medley                                                 5, 27
Heigh Ho, Heigh Ho                                              3
Hello Dolly                                                    28
Hello Muddah, Hello Faddah                                     57
Hello, Young Lovers                                            86
Hey Jude                                                      119
Hi Lilly                                                       36
Home On the Range                                       6, 26, 73
Homeward Bound                                                 84
How Much is That Doggie in the Window                          88
Hursley, England Has A Plan                                   112
I Am The Very Model Of A Modern Major General                  21
I Don't Want No More of Army Life                              49
I Got Rhythm                                                   30
I Have a CICS, You Have a CICS                                115
I Have Been Under a DC Blunder                                116
I Wish I Were an Oscar Mayer Wiener                            83
I Write The Songs                                               7
If I Had a Hammer                                          33, 43
If I Only Had a Brain                                          72
I'm a Lumberjack and I'm OK                                    59
I'm Gettin' Married in the Mornin'                             97
I'm Leaving on a Jet Plane                                    106
It's A Small, Small World                                   7, 32
It's Been A Long, Long Time                                    34
It's My CICS on Everything                               112, 123
I've Been Working on the Railroad                              25
Jesus Loves Me                                                 30
Jingle Bells                                               22, 98
Joy To The World                                           20, 34
Kids                                                           97
Lemon Tree                                                     36
Let It Be                                                       8
Let Me Call You Sweetheart                                     42
Let The Sun Shine Out                                          35
Lion Sleeps Tonight                                            95
Look What They've Done To My Song                               6
Lucille                                                        21
Lying Eyes                                                    109
Mamas Don't Let Your Babies Grow Up to be Cowboys              80
Mame                                                            8
Ma±ana                                                         41
Mary Had a Little Lamb                                         35
Mickey Mouse Club                                              22
Mickey Mouse Club Theme                                        53
Military Hymn Medley                                           54
MTA                                                   10, 60, 121
Music, Music, Music                                            75
MVS is Breaking My Heart                                       50
My Bonnie Lies Over The Ocean                              23, 68
My Country 'Tis of Thee                                        80
My Country Tis of Thee                                      9, 82
My Country 'Tis of Thee                                       122
My Favorite Things                                             11
Never on Sunday                                                98
New York, New York                                             81
Nothin' like a Dame                                            43
Notre Dame Fight Song                                          55
Ode to Joy                                                     56
Officer Krupke                                                 70
Oh Tannenbaum                                                 110
Oh What a Beautiful Morning                                    12
Old MacDonald Had a Farm                              31, 42, 112
Old MacDonald Had A Farm (No. 3)                               87
Old Settler's Song                                             39
On the Street Where You Live                                   68
On Top of 2000                                                117
On Top of Ol Smokey                                           117
Pack Up Your Troubles                                          90
Piano Man                                                     100
Pick a Bale O'Cotton                                           69
Plop, Plop, Fiz, Fiz                                           21
Policeman's March                                              47
Praise God From Whom All Blessings Flow                        12
Puff the Magic Dragon                                          58
Row, Row, Row Your Boat                                        90
Rubber Ducky                                                   13
Santa Claus is Coming to Town                                  77
Scarlet Ribbons                                                99
Seventy-Six Trombones                                          13
She's A Grand Old Flag                                   111, 123
Side By Side                                               32, 44
Sidewalks of New York                                          10
Silent Night                                                   95
Sixteen Tons                                               49, 75
Somewhere Over the Rainbow                                     88
Sounds of Silence                                              65
Stout-hearted Men                                              24
Suicide Is Painless                                            54
Swannee                                                        57
Sweet Georgia Brown                                            24
Sweet Violets                                                  11
Take Me Out To The Ball Game                                   14
Take This Job and Shove It                                     46
Taps                                                           94
Tea for Two                                                    28
Thanks for the Memories                                        94
The Daring Young Man On The Flying Trapeze                      4
Theme from Mahogany                                           110
There Is A Tavern in The Town                                  14
There's a Hole in the Bucket                                   63
There's No Business Like Show Business                         62
This Bud's for You                                             58
This Land is Your Land                                         48
Those Were The Days                                    15, 16, 45
Three Blind Mice                                               78
Tie A Yellow Ribbon Round the Old Oak Tree                     99
'Til We Meet Again                                             92
Twelve Bugs of Christmas                                      113
Twelve Days of Christmas                          37, 38, 76, 113
Waltzing Matilda                                               16
Way Down Yonder in New Orleans                                 62
We've Only Just Begun                                         121
When I'm Sixty-Four                                            56
When Johnny Comes Marching Home                                61
When You Wish Upon A Star                                  63, 84
Whoop-de-do Polka                                              29
Wiffenpoof Song                                                14
Will The Circle Be Unbroken                                    37
Windmills of Your Mind                                         17
Winter Wonderland                                             122
Write in C                                                    118
Yellow Rose of Texas                                           17
Yellow Submarine                                               18
Yessir, That's My Baby                                         27
Yesterday                                    18, 46, 79, 108, 116
You Are My Sunshine                                            27
Zip a - dee doo - dah                                         116


Notes
1 Houston Automatic Spooling Package (HASP)
2 Job Entry Subsystem 2              (JES2)
3 System generation                  (SYSGEN)
4 Initial Program Load               (IPL)
5 VS = Virtual System
6 RJE = Remote Job Entry
7 CPU = Central Processing Unit
8 CRT = Cathode Ray Tube
9 DBA = Data Base Administrator
10 IMS = Information Management System
11 1401 = second generation machine
12 370 = third generation machine
13 Abend F03
14 Type 3 software supplied by IBM on an AS IS basis
15 CTC = channel-to-channel
16 UP = uniprocessor (a single processor)
17 AP = attached processor
18 MVS = multiple virtual system
19 FE = field engineer
20 JQE = job queue element (JES2)
21 JCT = job control table (JES2)
22 SRB = supervisor request block
23 DCB = data control block
24 TCB = task control block
25 IOT = input/output table
26 UCB = unit control block
27 IOB = input/output block
28 DEB = data event block
29 CVT = communications vector table
30 MP = multiprocessor
SHARE Songbook - Table of Contents

i

SHARE Songbook

Intro-A
 -
SHARE Songbook

- 2 -
 -
Index - 2 -
 -
Notes - 1 -
 -
