 This dataset contains several utilities and system exits used at the
 University of Missouri Hospital and Clinics.

 The mods in this dataset have been used successfully and to the
 best of our knowledge they are operational, however, no warranty
 is made as to the accuracy of these programs or related material
 and no responsibility is assumed for any problems caused directly
 or indirectly by the use of these mods.  It is the users responsibility
 to evaluate the applicability of this material to their own
 installation.

 I would welcome any questions, suggestions, or comments you might
 have regarding this material.  Should you run into problems either
 installing or running these mods, give me a call or drop me a line:

                 Bill Warriner
                 Information Services  DCO 17.00
                 University of Missouri Hospital and Clinics
                 1400 Rock Quarry Road
                 Columbia,
                 Missouri  65212

                 phone: (314) 882-3773

 For the modifications for which SMP/E USERMODS are supplied, these
 mods can be installed by performing a RECEIVE and APPLY for the
 appropriate USERMODS (this will cause an assembly of the modules).
 DD statement requirements are as follows:
    DDname   Library description
    -------- -------------------
    SOURCE   FB-80 byte records.  Target source library (should NOT
             be this library).
    ASOURCE  FB-80 byte records.  Distribution source library
             (not needed unless USERMOD is ACCEPTed).
    SYSMODS  Load module library.  Distribution library for USERMOD
             modules.
    LINKLIB, LPALIB, etc. - standard IBM usage.
    CBTLIB   This library.  It is used as a TXLIB, and should also be
             included in the SYSLIB DD statement for the assemblies.

 If you prefer to perform your own assemblies, be sure to include
 this library and SYS1.AMODGEN in your assembler SYSLIB DD statement.
 Assembler H should be used (though some modules may assemble with
 assembler F).

 The source shown here is "dual-language," i.e., it may assemble
 differently for XA and non-XA macro libraries.  If you wish an
 object-compatible output, you should assemble it using 370 macro
 libraries or insert the following macro at the start of each module:
      SPLEVEL SET=1

 These modules require APAR OZ61611 to assemble correctly using MVS/370
 macro libraries.  If you do not have this APAR you should provide your
 own version of the SPLEVEL macro to set assembler global SETC &SYSSPLV
 to "1"
