..cm document requires (at least) the TN train to print properly
..im syspub layout=manual hy=full dark=yes
..sr pubFNsup = sup
.titlepage
SYSPUB USER'S GUIDE
..sk 7
COMPUTING CENTRE
..sk
UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO
..sk 1
..ur &sysdate
..sk 10;..fo
..pp;This User's Guide defines
..ur &pubSWver..
It was produced using the SYSPUB commands, with some
of the SCRIPT control words described in the "Introduction to SCRIPT".
It is assumed that you will have access to the "Introduction to SCRIPT"
as you are reading the SYSPUB User's Guide.
The current version of SCRIPT is:
..sp;..ce;..ur &sysversion
.prelim 'Overview'
..pp;Many publications in an academic environment have a number of
things in common:
..sp;..of 2
* preliminary pages:
a title page or area,
an abstract,
an acknowledgements section or page,
a Table of Contents,
a List of Tables,
and a List of Figures.
..sp;..of 2
* a main body:
chapters and appendices divided into
sections, subsections, and subsubsections,
with tables, figures, block quotations, footnotes, lists of points,
and some additional components such as an index and a bibliography.
..sp;..of
However, different types of documents have different "layout" requirements.
In some cases, the various levels of divisions in the main body must
be numbered (such as chapter "I", section "1.1", and subsection "1.1.1");
in others, such numbering is not required.
In some cases, new chapters must begin on new pages; in others, it isn't
desired.
..pp;The physical layout of a document
is just as important as the concepts and facts it
attempts to convey.
Ensuring that the layout of a document follows a set of standards
necessitates that an identical sequence of layout or "formatting" operations
be performed for each similar item in the document.
This is
..hw time--consuming,
repetitive,
..hw error--prone work.
If the document is being prepared on a
..hw type-writer,
it is also work which
must be re-done with each successive draft.
..pp;SYSPUB is a set of commands designed specifically for use in preparing and
formatting papers, theses, and other types of research and instructional
publications common to the university environment.
For years, people have used the computer to perform some of
this work;
SYSPUB offers a number of additional advantages.
..pp
SYSPUB provides 35 different commands for the various components of
your document.
There are also 9 different output formats, called
"layouts".
When you use SYSPUB, you begin by selecting the layout most appropriate to your
document, but the commands you use thereafter are the same for all layouts.
The following is a sample input file which
formats a document in the form of a paper:
..sk;..cc begin;..in 4
 .im syspub layout=paper
 .prelim 'Abstract'
 .para
 text of abstract
 .chapter 'Title of First Chapter'
 .para
 text of first paragraph
 .para
 text of second paragraph
 .section 'Title of Section'
 .para
 text of paragraph
 .subsection 'Title of Subsection'
 .para
   .
   .
   .
..in;..cc end
..pp;SYSPUB commands correspond to the component parts of your
document.
For example, to start a new section, you specify
.sp;     .section 'title of section'
.sp;and SYSPUB produces a section heading which conforms to the layout
style you are using.
The same is true for the other SYSPUB commands:
SYSPUB eliminates the need to learn a
..hw widely--accepted
set of layout standards.
..pp;SYSPUB eliminates the
..hw re--numbering
problems caused by revisions.
It does the numbering for all of the above items,
as appropriate to the layout you are using.
If you delete a section, or add a chapter, or change the order of subsections,
they are automatically
..hw re--numbered
the next time you format your document.
The creative desire to add or delete information no longer causes
additional "re-work".
..pp;With the simpler layouts, you don't need to use all of the SYSPUB commands.
For example, most small reports and papers do not have an index or a table
of contents.
However, with larger documents, such as users' guides and manuals, these
are usually desired.
..pp
SYSPUB also has a number of
..hw specific--purpose
layouts, including layouts for
theses which adhere to the style indicated in the University's
..us Thesis Regulations and Guide
brochure, publications in the style defined in the
..us Publication Manual of the
..us American Psychological Association,
and a layout for papers in the
..hw two--column
format of IEEE
..hw photo--offset
publications.
..pp;When you use SYSPUB, you are actually using a "superset" of the
University of Waterloo version of the SCRIPT text formatter, and all of the
capabilities of SCRIPT are available to you.
SYSPUB doesn't do anything which you couldn't do yourself using SCRIPT; it
just eliminates the need to learn everything about SCRIPT, and simplifies
a lot of tedious work.
The number of SCRIPT commands which you might need in addition to the SYSPUB
commands is very small
(in most cases, the SCRIPT commands which leave a blank line,
centre a line, and underscore a word will be sufficient).
.chapter 'Introduction'
.section 'Selecting a Layout'
..pp;The SYSPUB commands
are stored in a special library which you must imbed at the beginning
of your SCRIPT input file by placing the SCRIPT "imbed" control word
..sp;     .im syspub layout=xxx
..sp;before the first occurrence of any SYSPUB command (usually
as the very first line in your file.
.tabnum layouts
In place of the characters "xxx", you must specify one of the
..ur layouts shown in Table &layouts..
.tabbegin
.boxon
.table layouts 'Layouts'
..sp;..bx;..sp
..in +10 *
..oo 1     report
provides the basic SYSPUB commands
..sp;..oo 1     paper
for academic publications, term papers, etc
..br;..oo 1     IEEE
for two-column IEEE photo-offset papers
..sp;..oo 1     guide
for large papers, small manuals,
user's guides, etc
..sp;..oo 1     manual
for large manuals, books, etc
..sp;..oo 1     refman
for reference manuals
..br;(not yet fully-implemented)
..sp;..oo 1     thesis
for theses
..br;..oo 1     APA3
..oo 1     APA4
for theses in the APA style
..sk
..in -10 *;.boxoff
.tabend
..pp;The main features of each of the layouts are outlined in
.tabnum layouts
..ur Table &layouts..
This SYSPUB User's Guide was produced using
..sp;..ur      .im syspub layout=&layout
.tabbegin
.boxon
.table layouts 'Main Features of the Layouts'
..sp;..bx;..sp;..fo no
                                  R  P  G  M  R  T
                                  E  A  U  A  E  H
                                  P  P  I  N  F  E
                                  O  E  D  U  M  S
                                  R  R  E  A  A  I
                                  T        L  N  S
                                  ----------------
title area or page                Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y
preliminary sections                 Y  Y  Y  Y  Y
preliminary sections start
    new pages                              Y  Y  Y
table of contents, etc                  Y  Y  Y  Y
divisions of main body numbered      Y  Y  Y  Y  Y
major divisions start new pages            Y  Y  Y
appendices                           Y  Y  Y  Y  Y
bibliography                         Y  Y  Y  Y  Y
index                                   Y  Y  Y  Y
..fo
.boxoff
.tabend
.section 'The Output Device and the Formatting Environment'
..pp;SYSPUB assumes that the formatted document is to be produced on
..ix 2 'page layout' 'dimensions'
..ix 2 'page layout' 'left and right margins'
8.5x11 pages with a 1.5-inch margin on the left and 1-inch margins on the
top, bottom, and right.
If the output device is a high-speed line printer, no special
..ix 2 'page layout' printer
printer setup is necessary (aside from white paper and an upper- and
lower-case print train).  If the output device is a typewriter terminal,
..ix 2 'page layout' typewriter
the left margin of the typewriter should be set one-half inch in from
the left side of the paper.
..pp;If you want the text of the publication to be double-spaced, specify
..ix 2 'double-spacing'
the SCRIPT ".ds" control word
..us before |you imbed SYSPUB.
..pp;There are several
.footnote 'parameters'
..us A caution to experienced SCRIPT users:
The names of these parameters may not be used
as SCRIPT reference variables
anywhere in your input file, nor may you use any SCRIPT reference
variables which start with the letters "pub".
.footend
which you may specify on the ".im SYSPUB"
control word to control the formatting environment.
.fignum params
..ur For each of the parameters shown in Figure &params., the default
value is the one at the top of the vertical list.
.figbegin
.boxon
..fo no;..tr < ac > bc ( ab ) bb
      <  >        <    >     <    >     <    >
pitch=|10|  sides=|one |  hy=|on  |  ju=|on  |
      |12|        |both|     |full|     |half|
      (  )        (    )     |user|     |off |
                             |off |     (    )
                             (    )
..sp
   <            >     <               >
pl=|66, if SIX  |  ll=|60, if pitch=10|
   |88, if EIGHT|     |72, if pitch=12|
   | n          |     | n             |
   (            )     (               )
..sp
    < >            <      >         < >
lpi=|6|    pagenum=|bottom| headnum=|4|
    |n|            |top   |         |n|
    ( )            (      )         ( )
.figure params 'Parameters To Be Used With ".im syspub"'
..tr
.boxoff
.figend
..pp;SYSPUB assumes that the output is being produced on a 10-pitch device
(10 characters to the horizontal inch).
If you are using a 12-pitch output device, specify "pitch=12".
..ix 2 'output' 'characters per inch'
..pp;If the final copy of your publication is to be reproduced on both
..ix 2 output 'on both sides of the page'
sides of the page, the "sides" parameter will allow you to specify this.
..pp;The "hy" parameter controls hyphenation:  "on" results in automatic
..ix 2 hyphenation
hyphenation, "full" is the same as "on" but also imbeds the hyphenation
exception dictionary for you, "user" will hyphenate only at hyphen points
defined in the input text (such as in compound words), and "off" causes
hyphenation not to be performed at all.
..pp;The "ju", "pl", and "ll" parameters
..ix 2 output 'line length';..ix 2 output 'page length'
..ix 2 output justified
have the same function as their SCRIPT control-word
equivalents.
..pp;By default, SYSPUB always numbers pages at the bottom of the pages;
..ix numbering pages 'at the top'
the "pagenum" parameter provides a way of having SYSPUB number the pages
at the top, except for preliminary pages and the first page of
each major division of the main body.
..pp;For those layouts which cause the various headings to be numbered,
..ix 2 numbering headings
you can control the level to which headings are numbered by specifying the
"headnum" parameter.
By default, all levels of headings from the first level (chapters and
appendicies) down to the fourth level (subsubsections) are numbered by
those layouts.
For example, specifying "headnum=1" will cause chapters and appendices to
be numbered, but not sections, subsections, or subsubsections.
.section 'Planning Your Publication'
..pp;SYSPUB can be very useful while you are still at the stage of
planning the general organization of your publication.
You can enter the SYSPUB commands to create the major divisions
of the publication, and then
format and print this first-draft "outline" document.
Completing the publication then becomes a process of "filling in the
blanks".
.section 'Using SCRIPT'
..pp;If you are using SCRIPT under CMS, you will probably have to "define
storage" to at least "400K".
If you are using the BATCH Service, you will have to change your
EXEC card to
..sp;     //  EXEC  SCRIPT,SIZE=200K
..sp;Depending on the size of your publication, you might not need all
200K, but it is safer to start high and work down (the printout will tell
you how much was actually used).
..pp;If you are specifying the "hy=full" parameter, you should add
44K to the above figures.
.section "Using the SYSPUB User's Guide"
.pp;If you are using SYSPUB for the first time, you might find it most
productive to adopt a step-by-step "workbook" approach to using this
User's Guide.
First, select the layout which you suspect is most appropriate for the
publication you are going to prepare,
and read up to the end of the chapter which describes that layout.
Skim over the rest of the User's Guide so that you are aware of
the additional capabilities of SYSPUB.
While you are constructing your publication, treat the entire User's Guide
as a reference manual.
.chapter 'The REPORT Layout'
..ix 2 layouts REPORT
..pp;The REPORT layout is intended for small publications.
It provides the basic SYSPUB commands, as
.tabnum layouts
..ur shown in Table &layouts..
.fignum report
..ur Figure &report shows an example of the organization of the input
file for a report.
.figbegin;.boxon
 .im syspub layout=report
 .titlepage
 THIS IS THE TITLE OF THE REPORT
 .sk 2
 Name of Author
 .chapter 'Introduction'
 text for this chapter
 .chapter 'Hypothesis'
 text
 .chapter 'Method'
 text
 .chapter 'Observations'
 text
 .chapter 'Conclusions'
 text
.figure report 'Sample Input File Using The REPORT Layout'
.boxoff;.figend
.tabbegin
.boxon
.table layouts 'REPORT Layout Commands'
..tb set !;..tb 19
..ce 1
 .im syspub layout=report
..sp;..bx;..sp
..hy user;..co;..ju no
 .titlepage!to define the start of the title page
 .chapter!to create first-level divisions
 .section!to create second-level divisions
 .subsection!to create third-level divisions
 .subsub!to create fourth-level divisions
 .para!to start a new paragraph
..sp; .footnote, .footend
!to define a footnote
..sp;..of 19
 .quote!to define a multiple-line quotation
..sp;..of 19
 .point!to create up to three levels of lists of numbered points
..sp;..of
 .tabnum, .tabbegin, .table, .tabend
..of 19;!to generate a table number, start the table, print the title of
the table, and terminate the table
..sp;..of
 .fignum, .figbegin, .figure, .figend
..of 19;!similar to tables, but for figures
..sp;..of
 .boxon, .boxoff
..of 1
!to generate a box around text or a table or a figure
..of
..tb set
.boxoff
.tabend
.section 'The Title of the Publication'
..ix 2 'title area'
..pp;The publications for which the REPORT layout is intended
do not have a formal Title Page.
Instead, they have a "title area" at the top of the first page, and the
body of the report begins on this page, beneath the title area.
The SYSPUB command
..sp;     .titlepage
..ix 'titlepage'
..sp;is used to start the formatting of the title area.
It is followed, on the next input line, by the title of the publication
(in capital letters and
on as many input lines as are needed),
and by whatever additional text you wish to appear in the title area.
Do not attempt to centre the text on these input lines;
SYSPUB will do that for you, automatically, for all the lines of text
which appear in the title area.
.section 'Starting a Chapter'
..ix 2 headings chapter
..pp;The first-level divisions of the "main body" are called "chapters",
and are created by using the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .chapter 'title'
..ix chapter
..sk;The chapter title will be centered and printed in capital letters.
.section 'Starting a Section'
..ix 2 headings section
..pp;The second-level divisions of a REPORT layout are called "sections".
Sections are defined by using the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .section 'title'
..ix section
..sp;where "title" is the title of the section.
The section title will be printed in uppercase and underscored.
.subsection 'Starting a Subsection'
..ix 2 headings subsection
..pp;A section may be broken into third-level divisions called
"subsections" by using the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .subsection 'title'
..ix subsection
..sp;where "title" is the title of the subsection.
The subsection title will be printed as entered, underscored.
.subsub 'Starting a Subsubsection'
..ix 2 headings subsubsection
..pp;If necessary, subsections may be broken into
"subsubsections" by using the SYSPUB command
..sk;     .subsub 'title'
..ix subsub;..sk
The title will be printed exactly as entered.
.section 'Starting a Paragraph'
..ix 2 paragraphs
..pp;The ".para" command may be used to start a paragraph.
It is used as shown below:
..sp;..cc 4
     .para
     text of paragraph
     .para
     text of next paragraph
..pp;By default, the ".para" command indents each paragraph by putting
3 blanks at the start of the first line of text following the ".para"
command.
This can be changed by specifying an "alternate paragraph indent" as the
operand of the ".para" command.
For example, if
..sp;     .para 5
..sp;is specified, then the ".para" command will indent all paragraphs
5 spaces, from this point on and until the "paragraph indent" is re-set
by another ".para" command with an "alternate paragraph indent" specified.
.section 'Footnotes'
..ix 2 footnotes
..pp;Two SYSPUB commands are provided for the creation of footnotes.
They are used in the manner indicated below:
..sp
     text of the sentence containing the
     .footnote 'word'
     text of the footnote
     .footend
     to be referenced, followed by
     the rest of the sentence, if any.
..sp;For
.footnote 'example,'
This is a sample footnote.
.footend
the first footnote at the bottom of this page was created by
..sp;..cc begin
     For
     .footnote 'example,'
     This is a sample footnote.
     .footend
     the first footnote at the bottom ...
..cc end
.subsection 'Starting the Footnote'
..sp;     .footnote 'word'
..ix 'footnote'
..pp;The "word" to be referenced will be printed on the output line
and the footnote number
will be generated automatically and printed
immediately behind
.footnote 'it.'
If the output is being produced in 'OFFLINE' mode, the footnote numbers
are printed as superscripts.
If the output is being produced in 'ONLINE' mode, the footnote numbers are
printed as normal numbers, in parentheses.
The 'ONLINE' or 'OFFLINE' mode is determined by the SCRIPT options
OFFLINE (or PRINTER or DISK) and ONLINE (or MEMO).
For more information, see Appendix A.
.footend
..pp;If any punctuation is to come between the "word" and the footnote
number, it should be specified as part of the first-operand
"word" to be referenced.
If any punctuation is to be placed
immediately after the footnote number, it must be specified
in quotes as the second operand of the ".footnote" command, as in:
..sp;     .footnote 'word' 'punctuation'
..pp;Because the semicolon is the default SCRIPT
..us control word separator,;it is difficult to cause a
semicolon to be accepted as part of either operand of the ".footnote"
command.  In fact, an error may result if you do not use the SCRIPT ".cw"
CONTROL WORD SEPARATOR control word to nullify the control word separator
character, as shown below.
..sp;..cc 3;     .cw
     .footnote 'word' ';'  (or .footnote 'word;')
     text of the footnote
..sp;The ".footnote" command will reset the control word separator back
to the semicolon before it returns to process the text of the footnote.
.subsection 'Underscoring the Word to be Referenced'
..pp;If you want the "word" operand of the ".footnote" command to
be underscored, do it as follows:
..sp;     .footnote '.us word|'
..sp;The vertical bar at the end is essential.
.subsection 'Terminating the Footnote'
..sp;     .footend
..ix 'footend'
..pp;The ".footend" command must follow the text of the footnote.
If the footnote is being used in reference to something in the middle of
a sentence, the rest of that sentence must follow the ".footend" command.
.section 'Quotations'
..ix 2 quotations
.pp;The material in this section pertains only to multiple-line
(or "block") quotations;
"in-line" material in quotes (like the preceding words "in-line")
should be entered as normal text, without using the
SYSPUB commands described below.
..pp;To begin the quotation, use the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .quote begin
..ix 'quote' 'begin'
..sp;On the next input lines, enter the text of the quotation.
To terminate the quotation, use the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .quote end
..ix 'quote' 'end'
..sp;For example, the input sequence
..sp;..cc begin
     This is the last sentence preceding the quotation;
     to start the quotation, use ".quote begin".
     .quote begin
     This is the quoted material.
     Note that it is entered without quotes, and is
     automatically indented and single-spaced by SYSPUB.
     .quote end
     To terminate the quotation use ".quote end";
     this is the first sentence after the quotation.
..cc end;..sp;produces:
..sp;..cc begin;This is the last sentence preceding the quotation;
to start the quotation, use ".quote begin".
.quote begin
This is the quoted material.
Note that it is entered without quotes, and is
automatically indented and single-spaced by SYSPUB.
.quote end
To terminate the quotation, use ".quote end";
this is the first sentence after the quotation.
..cc end
.subsection 'Footnotes Inside Quotations'
..ix 2 footnotes 'inside quotations'
..pp;If you want to footnote a "block" quotation, the SYSPUB commands
for the footnote should be used
..us inside;those for the quotation, as shown in the following example:
..sp;..cc begin
     .quote begin
     text of quotation,
     up to but not including the last
     .footnote 'word'
     text of footnote ...
     .footend
     .quote end
..cc end
.section 'Lists of Points'
..ix 2 points
..pp;It is often appropriate to present a sequence of information as a
numbered list of points.
The SYSPUB commands ".point begin", ".point", and ".point end"
may be used to generate such a numbered list.
.subsection 'Starting a List of Points'
     .point begin
..ix 'point' 'begin'
..pp;The SYSPUB command ".point begin" must immediately precede the
input line containing the text for the first
point in a list.
.subsection 'Continuing the List of Points'
     .point
..ix point
..pp;The SYSPUB command ".point" is used to terminate the text of the
preceding point and is followed by the
input line containing the
text of the next point.  The number of the point
will be one greater than the number of the preceding point.
..pp;For example, the input sequence
..sp;..cc begin
     This is the last sentence before the list of points;
     now comes the input to create the list of points.
     .point begin
     This is the text for the first point.
     .point
     This is the text for the next (and last) point.
     .point end
..cc end;..sp;produces:
..sp;This is the last sentence before the list of points;
now comes the input to create the list of points.
.point begin;This is the text for the first point.
.point;This is the text for the next (and last) point.
.point end
.subsection 'Points Within Points'
..ix 2 points 'multiple levels'
..pp;SYSPUB supports three levels of points.
The ".point" command can also be used to begin a second-level point if
you are already in the middle of a list of points.
..sp;     .point 2
..ix point '2'
..sp;will cause SYSPUB to begin creating second-level points, numbered
alphabetically.
To return to the next point at the first level, specify
..sp;     .point 1
..ix point '1'
..sp;and follow it with the text of the next first-level point.
..pp;If you are creating second-level points and want to start creating
third-level points, then specify
..sp;     .point 3
..ix 'point' '3'
..sp;Third-level points are numbered as lower-case roman numerals.
To return to second-level points, specify
..sp;     .point 2
..sp;To return to first-level points from third-level points, specify
..sp;     .point 1
.subsection 'Terminating the List of Points'
     .point end
..ix 'point' 'end'
..pp;The SYSPUB command ".point end" is used after the text of the last
point, to return from the point-formatting mode to the "normal text" mode.
.subsection 'Altering the Numbering Style for Lists of Points'
..ix 2 numbering points
..pp;By default, SYSPUB numbers first-level points using arabic numerals,
second-level points using lower-case alphabetics, and third-level points
using lower-case roman numerals.
You can change this style by using the "set" operand of the SYSPUB
".point" command.  For example,
..sp;     .point set 1 a i
..ix 'point' 'set'
..sp;will set the point-numbering style to the defaults just described.
..sp;     .point set i a 1
..sp;will cause first-level points to be numbered using lower-case
roman numerals ("i"), second-level points to use lower-case alphabetics ("a"),
and third-level points to use arabic numerals ("1").
..pp;Operands other than "1", "a", and "i" are valid.
A "b" operand causes SYSPUB to generate bullets for all points at the
level for which it is specified.
(If the output is being produced at an on-line terminal, asterisks are
generated instead of bullets.)
If a character other than one of "1", "a", "i", or "b" is specified,
then that character will be used in a fashion similar to that for "bullets".
.subsection 'Limitations'
..pp;There are a few things to keep in mind when using the above
point-generating SYSPUB commands.
.point begin
The "point" commands
automatically indent the left and right margins, so that
the text of the points are "set in" from the main text.
Therefore, if you wish to use the SCRIPT ".in" INDENT control word in a
point, use the additive rather than the absolute form of the arguments.
.point
It is possible to use ".point end" to return from "point mode" temporarily
(for example, to explain something about the preceding or following
points) and then resume the "point mode" without interrupting the
numbering sequence of the list of points.
..ix 2 numbering points
In this case, after the text for the
"normal mode" has been specified, the list of points can be continued
by using the SYSPUB command ".point" instead of ".point begin".
.point end
For example, the text of the above point was terminated with ".point end",
and the text of the next point was started with ".point" rather than
with ".point begin".
.point
If you want to alter the formatting environment for all the points
..ix 2 points 'altering the format'
generated between the
".point begin" and ".point end" commands, do it immediately
before the ".point begin" command.  For example, if the normal formatting
mode is "double-spaced and right-justified", but you want the text of the
points to be single-spaced and not right-justified, you can specify
..sp;     ,ss;.ju no;.point begin
..sp;and then the text for the first point.
The ".point end" command will restore the default formatting parameters.
(The ",ss" above is a "no-break single space" control word;
the comma is established as the no-break contro word indicator
when you imbed SYSPUB -- see Appendix A for more details).
.point end
.section 'Boxes'
..ix 2 boxes
..ix boxon;..ix boxoff
..pp;The two SYSPUB commands ".boxon" and ".boxoff" may be
used to start and terminate a box.
For example,
..sp;..cc 5
     .boxon
     This text is surrounded by a box which
     was created by the ".boxon" and
     ".boxoff" commands.
     .boxoff
..sp;produces:
..cc begin
.boxon
This text is surrounded by a box which
was created by the ".boxon" and
".boxoff" commands.
.boxoff
..cc end
..pp;The conditions which must be adhered to and the restrictions which
exist within the range of ".boxon" and ".boxoff" are defined below.
.point begin
The left side of the box will be generated one position to the right of
the current SCRIPT ".in" INDENT value.  The right side of the box
will be generated in the last position of the output line, as defined
by the current value of the SCRIPT ".ll" LINE LENGTH value
modified by the current "right-indent" value of the SCRIPT ".in"
INDENT control word.
.point;You may use the SCRIPT ".bx" control word to create "horizontal
lines" within the range of ".boxon" and ".boxoff".
.point;If you wish to use the SCRIPT ".in" indent control word
..ix 2 boxes 'indenting inside'
within the range of ".boxon" and ".boxoff", then use
the additive rather than the absolute form of the arguments; for example,
use ".in +5" rather than ".in 5".  This is necessary because of the SCRIPT
".in" control words issued by ".boxon" and ".boxoff":
..sp;..cc 2
     .boxon  issues  ..in +3 -3
     .boxoff issues  ..in -3 +3
.point
The SYSPUB ".boxon" and ".boxoff" commands, by themselves, make no
attempt to keep the box from being split over a page boundary.
If you do not want it split
across a page boundary,
then use the SCRIPT ".cc" or ".fk" or ".fb"
control words to ensure that the box is contiguous.  If you use
".fb" or ".fk", or ".cc" in its "begin/end" form to do this,
do not rely on the values of any of the SCRIPT
system reference variables such as "&syspage" or "&sysline" within the
range of ".boxon" and ".boxoff", as there is no
guarantee that the box will print in the position in which it was
formatted; use ".cc" with a numeric argument instead.
.point end
.section 'Tables'
..ix 2 tables
..pp;Turabian Ý1973:159¨ makes an excellent statement concerning
the attention you must give to tables if you are going to use them
effectively:
.quote begin
If tables are to serve satisfactorily the purpose for which they are made,
they not only must be accurately compiled but must be so arranged that
they can be easily read and interpreted.
To these ends careful spacing, ruling, arrangement of headings, and,
finally, the placing of the tables
with respect to the text all contribute.
.quote end
..pp;The following SYSPUB commands
are used to construct tables.
The SYSPUB command ".tabnum" is used to generate the table number.
The SYSPUB command ".tabbegin" is used to start the definition of the text
and SCRIPT control words which create the table.
The SYSPUB command ".table"
is used to print the table number and title; and the SYSPUB command
".tabend" is used to end the definition of the table and to cause it to be
positioned
for printing.  If the table will fit in the position at which you have
defined it, it will do so.  Otherwise, SCRIPT will promote it to another
page (usually, the next page).
To give you a better idea of how these commands are used, consider the
following example;
the commands themselves are described in more detail following the example.
.subsection 'Example of a Table'
..pp;Assume that we now wish to make our
first reference to a particular table.
To begin, we will generate "the next available table number" and
assign it to the reference variable "example".
..sp;     .tabnum example
..sp;Then, we can use the reference variable "example" to make
the reference to the table.
..sp;..cc 2
     .ur As can be seen from Table &example.,
     the quality of ... (rest of sentence).
..sp;which will actually print as
..sp;..in 5 -5;.tabnum example
..ur As can be seen from Table &example.,
the quality of ... (rest of sentence).
..sp;..in 0;Then, at the end of the paragraph in which that sentence
appears, we can specify the text and the SCRIPT control words
and SYSPUB commands
required to generate, position, and print the table itself.
..sp
     .tabbegin
     .table example 'This is a Sample Table'
     first line of table
     second line of table
      .
      .
      .
     last line of table
     .tabend
..pp;The table which the above commands create is printed below.
The box around the table is
..us not;generated by the above commands; an explanation of how the box
was generated is given later in this chapter.
.tabbegin
.boxon
.table example 'This is a Sample Table'
first line of table
second line of table
 .
 .
 .
last line of table
.boxoff
.tabend
.subsection 'The Table Number'
..ix 2 numbering tables
..pp;A table should be positioned as soon as possible
..us after
the first reference to it in the text.  Since tables must be numbered
in ascending order throughout the publication, the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .tabnum refname
..ix tabnum
..sp;enables you to generate "the next available number"
for a table and assign that number to the reference variable "refname",
and then use "refname" to refer to the table in the text, before the
table is defined, constructed, and printed.
.subsection 'Positioning the Table'
..pp;It is desirable to print the table itself as soon as possible after
it has first been referenced in the text.
Therefore, at the end of the paragraph which contains the first reference
to the table, the SYSPUB commands and SCRIPT control words required to
define the table should be inserted, starting with the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .tabbegin
..ix tabbegin
..sp;The ".tabbegin" command causes single-spacing to be in effect
and places you in unformatted mode.
The SYSPUB ".tabend" command described below restores the
formatting mode and the "line-spacing"
to whatever was in effect before ".tabbegin" was
encountered.
.subsection 'The Title of the Table'
..ix 2 headings table
..pp;The ".tabbegin" command should be followed by the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .table refname 'title of table'
..ix table
..sp;which prints the word "Table",
the value of "refname" (the table number), the title of the table, and
leaves you in ".fo no" mode.
It should then be followed by the text and SCRIPT control words needed to
construct the table (or to leave space in which to paste in the table, if
that is how it is to be done).
.subsection 'Terminating the Table'
..ix 2 tables 'full-page'
..pp;To terminate the table, the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .tabend
..ix tabend
..sp;must be inserted next.
It causes the table to be positioned and printed,
and restores the formatting environment for normal text.
Every attempt will be made to
keep the table contiguous on one page (unless the table requires more than
one page).
..pp;If you specify this command in the form
..sp;     .tabend page
..sp;then SYSPUB will add the number of blank lines required to
result in a full-page table.
..ix 'tabend' 'page'
..ix 'figend' 'page'
.subsection 'Limitations'
..pp;You cannot define a footnote within the range of a table.
Also, don't use the SCRIPT ".ix" index control
word within a table; it will most likely result in the wrong page number
in the index, since the table will probably print some other than where
where it was formatted.
.section 'Figures'
..ix 2 figures;..ix 2 figures . 'see also "tables"'
..pp;The considerations which must be given
to tables also apply to figures.
The SYSPUB commands for figures
are exact parallels of those defined above for tables, with the
exception that the ".figbegin" command leaves you in ".fo no" mode.
For example,
.fignum sampfig
..sp;..cc 12
     .fignum sampfig
     .figbegin
     first line of figure
     second line of figure
      .
      .
      .
     last line of figure
     .figure sampfig 'This is a Sample Figure'
     .figend
..ix fignum;..ix figbegin;..ix figure;..ix figend
..sk;..ur produces Figure &sampfig below.
Note that the text and SCRIPT control words
which define the figure are placed
..us before;the SYSPUB ".figure" command, whereas,
for a table, they are placed
..us after;the ".table" command.
.figbegin
.boxon
first line of figure
second line of figure
 .
 .
 .
last line of figure
.figure sampfig 'This is a Sample Figure'
.boxoff;.figend
..sp;..in 0;..fo
.section 'Calling Tables or Figures by Some Other Name'
..ix 2 tables 'calling them something else'
..pp;If you don't need to use both tables and figures in your
publication, you can make use of the
..us capabilites
of the SYSPUB commands for tables and figures to create other
entities.
..pp;For example, if your publication had a number of "examples", and
you wanted to have them handled the same way SYSPUB handles tables
and figures, you could instruct SYSPUB that your "figures" are
really "examples", by specifying
..sp;     .sr pubFIhdr = 'Example'
..sp;immediately after you imbed SYSPUB and before any of the SYSPUB
commands for the main body of the publication.
You would still use the SYSPUB commands for "figures", but they would
all be annotated as "examples" in the output.
..pp;Similarly, if you wanted tables to be called "illustrations", you
could do so by specifying
..sp;     .sr pubTAhdr = 'Illustration'
.section 'Putting a Box Around a Table or Figure'
..ix 2 boxes 'around a table or figure'
..pp;If it is appropriate to draw a box around a table or figure
(or whatever you are calling them)
to set it off, the two SYSPUB commands ".boxon" and ".boxoff" may be
used to create the box.  They were used, for example, to put the
..ur box around Table &example..
The ".boxon"
..ix boxon;command was placed immediately after the ".tabbegin"
command, and the ".boxoff"
..ix boxoff;command was placed immediately before the ".tabend" command.
.chapter 'The PAPER Layout'
..ix 2 layouts PAPER
..pp;The PAPER layout provides all of the commands available with REPORT,
but in a layout style more suited
to small research publications, technical papers, or term papers.
The various levels of divisions of the "main body"
are numbered (such as "1.2" for the second "section" in the first "chapter").
.tabnum layouts
..ur PAPER also provides the additional commands described in Table &layouts..
.tabbegin;.boxon
.table layouts 'PAPER Layout Commands'
..ce 1
 .im syspub layout=paper
..sp;..bx;..sp
..co;..ju no
..tb set !;..tb 19
..of 1
 .prelim!for preliminary material,
such as an abstract or acknowledgement
..br;..of 19
 .appendix!to create appendices
..br;..of 19
 .bibliography!to start a bibliography
..br;..of 19
 .bib!to start a bibliographic entry
..of;..tb set
.boxoff;.tabend
.section 'Preliminary Material'
..ix 2 'preliminary sections'
..pp;Any "preliminary" material which the paper requires
may be generated by using the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .prelim 'title'
..ix prelim
..pp;The two most obvious uses of the ".prelim" command are to generate
"abstract" and "acknowledgements" material, such as
..sp;     .prelim 'Abstract'
..sp;followed by the text of the abstract, and
..sp;     .prelim 'Acknowledgements'
..sp;followed by the text of the acknowledgements.
.section 'Starting an Appendix'
..ix 2 appendixes
..pp;An appendix is generated in exactly the same way as a chapter, by
using the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .appendix 'title'
..ix appendix
.section 'The Bibliography'
..ix 2 bibliography
..pp;The SYSPUB command
..sp;     .bibliography
..ix bibliography
..sp;starts the formatting of the bibliography.
If the word "BIBLIOGRAPHY" is not an appropriate header for the
bibliography, then use
..sp;     .bibliography 'alternate header'
..sp;where "alternate header", for example, might be something
like "Sources Consulted".
.subsection 'Starting a Bibliographic Entry'
..ix 2 bibliography entries
..ix bib
..pp;Each of the bibliographic entries is started with the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .bib
..sp;If you do not have a style to which you must adhere, then
it is suggested that the following general form be used to enter the text
for the bibliographic entry.
..sp;..cc 4
     .bib
     last name of author, first name, initials.
     .us title of reference.
     place of publication:  publisher, year.
..pp;You do not need to specify any SCRIPT control words for the
formatting of the bibliographic entries;
the ".bib" command does that for you (see the Bibliography
at the end of this User's Guide for an example of the formatting).
..pp;In order to keep the text for a bibliographic entry on one page,
SYSPUB internally places a SCRIPT ".cc" begin/end sequence around the
text of the bibliographic entry.
This means that you cannot use ".cc", ".cp", ".fk", ".fn", or ".fb" in
conjunction with the SYSPUB commands for the bibliography.
.subsection 'Terminating the Bibliography'
..ix 'bib end'
..pp;The text of the
..us last
bibliographic reference must be followed by the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .bib end
.subsection 'Referencing Bibliographic Entries'
..ix 2 bibliography references
..pp;In the main body of the text,
bibliographic entries are referenced simply by specifying the
author's last name followed by the date of the publication and the
the appropriate page number(s) in the publication, as suggested by
TurabianÝ1973:182-183¨.
.fignum egbibli
..pp;..ur The example in Figure &egbibli is taken from the Bibliography
for this SYSPUB User's Guide.
For an alternate method, see Appendix B.
.figbegin;.boxon;..li >
.bibliography
.bib
.us Introduction to SCRIPT.
Waterloo:
University of Waterloo Computing Centre, 1977.
.bib
.us MLA Style Sheet.
2nd ed.  New York:
Modern Language Association of America, 1970.
.bib end
>>li .
.figure egbibli 'Input For a Sample Bibliography'
.boxoff;.figend
.section 'Creating Additional Pages After the Main Body'
..pp;The ".prelim" command can also be used to create additional pages
after the main body of the publication.
.chapter 'The GUIDE Layout'
..ix 2 layouts GUIDE
..pp;With layouts lesser than GUIDE, SYSPUB does not produce a Table of
Contents, and hence is somewhat less expensive to use.
With the GUIDE layout (or greater), SYSPUB includes the titles of
preliminary pages, chapters, appendices, sections, subsections, and
subsubsections in the Table of Contents, together with the titles
specified by the commands introduced in this chapter.
It also constructs a List of Tables and a List of Figures, using the
titles specified by the SYSPUB commands which create tables and figures.
..pp;The GUIDE layout is intended for papers which are large enough to
warrant a Table of Contents and/or an Index, or for other medium-sized
documents which do not warrant starting each chapter on a new page.
It is assumed that there will be at least one section created by the
".prelim" command (subsequent occurrences do not start new pages),
followed by one or more sections created by ".chapter" (only the first
chapter will begin on a new page), followed by zero or more sections
created by ".appendix" (each appendix starts on a new page),
..us possibly;followed by the additional commands introduced
.tabnum layouts
..ur in Table &layouts..
.tabbegin;.boxon
.table layouts 'GUIDE Layout Commands'
..ce 1
 .im syspub layout=guide
..sp;..bx;..sp
..co;..ju no
..tb set !;..tb 19
 .index!to print an index
 .contents!to print a table of contents
 .tables!to print a "list of tables"
 .figures!to print a "list of figures"
..tb set
.boxoff;.tabend
.section 'The Index'
..ix 2 index entries
..pp;If it is appropriate that your publication contain an index, then
you should use the SCRIPT ".ix" control word
to create the index entries, as they occur in the text
of your publication.
If you do not want your publication to have an index, ignore this section.
.subsection 'Printing the Index'
..ix 2 index
..pp;At the end of the main body of the publication,
use the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .index
..ix index
..sp;to cause the index to be printed.  The word "INDEX" will be
centred at the top of the first page of the index.
.subsection 'Publications With More Than One Index'
..ix index 'more than one index'
..pp;If it is appropriate that your publication contain more than one
index (the SCRIPT ".ix" control word allows you to construct up to nine
concurrently), then each index can be printed by specifying the SYSPUB
command
..sp;     .index n 'title'
..sp;once for each index, where "n" is the index number (from 1 to 9)
and "title" is the title to be centred at the top of the first page of
index "n".
..pp;Note that this form of the ".index" command may also be used to
specify an alternate title for a publication which contains only one
index, by specifying
..sp;     .index 1 'title'
.subsection 'Printing the Index in Multiple-Column Mode'
..ix 2 index 'multiple-column output'
..pp;By default, the index will be printed in single-column mode, the
same as the rest of the publication.
If your index entries are short, you may wish to have them printed in
more than one column per page.
For example,
..sp;     .index n 'title' 2
..sp;will cause the index to be printed in two columns.
You can specify a number larger than "2" for this third operand, but you
may run into problems unless you have used the "ll" parameter to specify
a line length greater than the default when you imbedded SYSPUB.
.section 'The Table of Contents'
..ix 2 'contents'
..ix 2 headings 'table of contents'
..pp;The Table of Contents includes the titles and page numbers
of any titles generated
by the SYSPUB commands ".prelim", ".part", ".chapter", ".appendix",
".section", ".subsection", ".subsub",
".bibliography", and ".index".
For chapters and appendices, the chapter and appendix numbers are printed
to the left of the titles.
.subsection 'Printing the Table of Contents'
..ix contents
..pp;The "contents" command causes the printing of the Table of Contents.
It is of the form
..sp;     .contents 'alternate header'
..sp;where "alternate header" is any character string you wish
to use as the title of the Table of Contents.  If you do not specify an
"alternate header", then the header "TABLE OF CONTENTS" will be used.
..pp;Unless you have tables or figures, ".contents" will be the last SYSPUB
command in your input file.
The resulting Table of Contents pages will be numbered in lower-case
roman numerals, starting one greater than the last "preliminary page"
before the main body.
You will have to remove these Table of Contents pages from the end of
the output and insert them in their proper place.
.subsection 'Printing the List of Tables'
..ix 2 tables 'list of tables'
..ix 2 headings 'list of tables'
..ix tables
..pp;If the publication contains tables, the SYSPUB command ".tables"
should be used to cause the printing of the List of Tables.
It is of the form
..sp;     .tables 'alternate header'
..sp;where "alternate header" is any character string you wish
to use as the title of the List of Tables.  If you do not specify an
"alternate header", then the header "LIST OF TABLES" will be used.
.subsection 'Printing the List of Figures'
..ix 2 figures 'list of figures'
..ix 2 headings 'list of figures'
..ix figures
..pp;If the publication contains figures, the SYSPUB command
".figures" should be used to cause the printing of the List of Figures.
It is of the form
..sp;     .figures 'alternate header'
..sp;where "alternate header" is any character string you wish
to use as the title of the List of Figures.  If you do not specify an
"alternate header", then the header "LIST OF FIGURES" will be used.
.chapter 'The MANUAL Layout'
..ix 2 layouts MANUAL
..pp;The MANUAL layout is intended for documents which are large enough to
warrant a formal title page and a number of preliminary pages.
If the document is large enough,
chapters may be grouped together in "parts".
Preliminary pages, parts, chapters, and appendices
each start on a new page.
.tabnum layouts
..ur The additional SYSPUB commands are shown in Table &layouts..
.tabbegin;.boxon
.table layouts 'MANUAL Layout Commands'
..ce 1
 .im syspub layout=manual
..sp;..bx;..sp
..co;..ju no
..tb set !;..tb 19
 .part!to group chapters into "parts"
..tb set
.boxoff;.tabend
.section 'The Title Page'
..ix 2 'title page'
..pp;With the MANUAL layout, the text which follows the ".titlepage" command
will appear on a "title page" by itself.
This page will be page "i" of the publication, although it will not
have a page number printed on it.
The other "preliminary pages" of the publication, if any, will be
numbered at the bottom of each page, beginning with "ii".
.section 'Parts'
..ix 2 headings parts
..ix 2 parts
..pp;If the main body of the publication is large enough that it warrants
being separated into "parts", then the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .part 'title'
..ix part
..sp;may be used to generate each of the "part" title pages.
The word "PART", the part number (in upper-case roman numerals), and the
part title will be centered on an unnumbered page by themselves.
The part title will print in uppercase on the part-title page, but will be
added to the Table of Contents as you specified it.
.section 'Chapters'
..ix 2 headings chapter
..pp;Each first-level division started by the ".chapter" command will begin
on a new page, with the word "Chapter" and the chapter number
centered at the top of the page, and the title of the chapter centered
below.
.subsection 'Calling the "Chapters" by Some Other Name'
..ix 2 chapters 'calling them something else'
..pp;In some publications, the term "chapter" may not be appropriate,
and therefore you may want some word other than "Chapter" to
be used as a "header"
at the beginning of each "chapter".
For example, if you specify
..sp;     .major 'Section'
..ix 'major'
..sp;immediately before the
first occurence of ".chapter", SYSPUB will print the
word "Section" at the top of the first page of each "chapter".
Note that you must still use the
".chapter" command to create the major divisions of your publication,
even though you are calling them something else.
.section 'Example'
.fignum outline
..pp;..ur Figure &outline illustrates the organization of the input
file for the "manual" layout.
.figbegin;.boxon
 .im syspub layout=manual
 .titlepage
 THIS IS THE TITLE OF THE MANUAL
      .
      . other lines for the title page
      .
 .prelim 'Abstract'
 .chapter 'Introduction'
      .
      .
      .
 .appendix 'other stuff'
 .contents
 .tables
 .figures
.figure outline 'Sample Input File Using The MANUAL Layout'
.boxoff;.figend
.chapter 'The REFMAN Layout'
..pp;The REFMAN layout has not yet been fully implemented or tested.
It is intended to produce output identical to that of MANUAL except
for the numbering of pages, tables, and figures.
It also assumes that the document is to be published on both sides of the
page.
..cc begin;.boxon
..ju no
 .im syspub layout=refman
.boxoff;..cc end
.chapter 'The THESIS Layout'
..ix 2 layouts THESIS
..pp;The THESIS layout produces output
.footnote identical
Chapter numbers will normally be printed as upper-case roman numerals.
However,
if the ".part" command has been used before the first ".chapter" command is
encountered, then chapter numbers are printed as arabic numerals to avoid
confusion.
.footend
..ix 2 numbering chapters
to that of the MANUAL
.tabnum layouts
..ur layout, and provides the commands shown in Table &layouts to create
the additional preliminary pages required in a thesis.
.tabbegin;.boxon
.table layouts 'THESIS Layout Commands'
..ce 1
 .im syspub layout=thesis
..sp;..bx;..sp
..co;..ju no
..tb set !;..tb 19
..of 1
 .author!to specify and position
the name of the author on the title page
..of 1
 .course!to specify the name of the course
for which the document is begin submitted, or
..of 1
 .degree!to specify the name of the degree
for which the thesis is being submitted
..of 1
 .date!to generate the date and copyright lines
..of 1
 .declaration!creates the "author's declaration" page
..of 1
 .borrow!creates the "borrower's page"
..of;..tb set
.boxoff;.tabend
.section 'Additional Commands for the Title Page'
..ix 2 'title page' 'for a thesis'
.subsection "The Author's Name"
..pp;The author's name is positioned and printed on the Title Page by using
the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .author 'full name of author'
..ix 'author'
..sk;It may be followed by any additional lines of text
needed to satisfy the requirements of the thesis.
..pp;If the author's name contains the apostrophe character ('), then
the ".author" command must be specified instead as
..sp;     .author "full name of author"
..sp;using the double-quote (") instead of apostrophes to delimit
the author's name.
.subsection 'Degree'
..pp;If the publication is being submitted as a thesis in fulfillment of
degree requirements, then use the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .degree 'title of degree'
..ix 'degree'
..sp;followed on the next input line(s) by the name of the department
granting the degree.
.subsection 'Course'
..pp;If the publication is not really a thesis but is being submitted
in partial fulfillment of
the requirements for a particular course, then use the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .course 'course code' 'title of course'
..ix 'course'
..sp;followed on the next input line(s) by any additional
relevant information you must supply about the course.
.subsection 'The Date of the Publication'
..ix 'date'
..pp;The ".date" command causes the "date" and "copyright" lines to be
printed at the bottom of the page.  It is of the form
..sp;     .date 'copyright symbol'
..sp;The "copyright symbol" is optional; if the command is used as ".date"
only, then the characters "(c)" will be used as the copyright symbol.
..pp;If the "date" and "copyright" lines which the ".date" command
produces are not appropriate for your publication, you can omit the
".date" command, and instead use the appropriate SCRIPT control words
and text lines.
.section "The Author's Declaration Page"
..ix 2 "author's declaration page"
..pp;Most theses must have some form of "author's declaration" page.
The SYSPUB command
..sp;     .declaration
..ix declaration
..sp;will generate such a page, with the appropriate words on it.
.section "The Borrower's Page"
..ix 2 "borrower's page"
..pp;A thesis must have a "borrower's page".
Such a page will be generated by the SYSPUB command
..sp;     .borrow
..ix borrow
.section 'Example'
.fignum outline1
..pp;..ur Figure &outline1 illustrates the organization of the input
file for a thesis.
.figbegin;.boxon
 .im syspub layout=thesis
 .titlepage
 THIS IS THE TITLE OF THE THESIS
 .author 'my name'
 .degree 'name of Degree'
 Department granting the Degree
 .date
 .declaration
 .borrow
 .prelim 'Abstract'
 .prelim 'Acknowledgements'
 .chapter 'Introduction'
 .chapter 'Hypothesis'
 .chapter 'Method'
 .chapter 'Observations'
 .chapter 'Conclusions'
 .appendix 'other stuff'
 .contents
 .tables
 .figures
.figure outline1 'Sample Input File Using The THESIS Layout'
.boxoff;.figend
.chapter 'Special Layouts'
..pp;Several special-purpose layouts are available with SYSPUB,
for layout styles particular to specific publishing groups.
SYSPUB currently has layouts for IEEE and APA.
.section 'The IEEE Layout'
..ix 2 layouts IEEE
..pp;The IEEE layout is intended for papers which are to be produced on
the grid sheets provided by the IEEE Editorial Department for
the preparation of papers in two-column format for IEEE photo-offset
publications.
It provides all of the SYSPUB commands which correspond to the PAPER
layout, with the differences and/or exceptions noted below:
.point begin
none of the headings produced by ".chapter", ".section", or ".subsection"
will be numbered;
.point
titles produced by ".chapter" will be centred,
underscored, and capitalized;
.point
titles produced by ".section" will underscored and printed flush with the
left margin, exactly as entered;
.point
titles printed by ".subsection" will be underscored and indented as
the starting text in a new paragraph.
.point end
.fignum ieee
A sample input file using the IEEE layout is
..ur shown in Figure &ieee..
.figbegin
.boxon
..fo no
..li ?
.im syspub layout=ieee
TITLE OF PAPER
Name of Author
Author's Business Affiliation
City, Province, Country
.prelim 'Abstract'
text of short summary or abstract of paper
.chapter 'Title of First Major Heading in Paper'
text
.section 'Title of Second-Level Heading'
text
.subsection 'Title of Third-Level Heading'
etc
.bibliography 'References'
etc
??li .
.figure ieee 'Sample Input File Using The IEEE Layout'
.boxoff;.figend
..pp;If the paper is being produced at 8 lines to the inch, then specify
the parameter "lpi=8" on the ".im syspub" command.
.section 'The APA Layouts'
..pp;There are two layouts which conform to
the style of the American Psychological Association.
They provide all of the SYSPUB commands which correspond to the THESIS
layout, with the differences and/or exceptions noted below:
.point begin
headings for the various divisions in the main body will not be numbered,
or named;
.point
layout APA4 supports four levels of divisions of the text:
..ix 2 layouts APA4
.point 2
titles produced by ".chapter" will be in uppercase, centered, and will
start on a new page;
.point
titles produced by ".section" will underscored, centered, and printed as
entered;
.point
titles produced by ".subsection" will be underscored and printed flush
with the left margin, exactly as entered;
.point
titles produced by ".subsub" will be underscored and indented as
the starting text in a new paragraph, exactly as entered.
.point 1
layout APA3 supports three levels of divisions of the text:
..ix 2 layouts APA3
.point 2
titles produced by ".chapter" will be underscored, centered, and printed
as is;
.point
titles produced by ".section" will be underscored and printed flush
with the left margin, exactly as entered;
.point
titles produced by ".subsection" will be underscored and indented as
the starting text in a new paragraph, exactly as entered.
.point end
.appendix 'CHANGING THE FORMAT OF THE PUBLICATION'
.section 'Top and Bottom Margins and Titles'
..pp;If you wish your publication to have a TOP MARGIN or BOTTOM MARGIN
..ix 2 'page layout' 'top and bottom margins'
different than those which are the SCRIPT defaults, then specify
the SCRIPT ".tm" and/or ".bm" control words
..us before |you imbed SYSPUB.
SYSPUB will fail to work properly if you
re-define them once SYSPUB has been imbedded.
..pp;SYSPUB, by default, removes from you all
..ix 2 'page layout' 'top and bottom titles'
control over the number of title lines in the top and bottom
margins, because it constantly issues its own SCRIPT ".hs" and ".fs"
control words
as it is deciding when to print the top and
bottom title lines.
You can re-define the top and bottom title after you imbed SYSPUB,
but SYSPUB will decide when to print the top title and when to
print the bottom title.
If you wish to define any number of top and bottom title lines which are
..us always |to be printed at the top and bottom of each and every page,
then do the following
..us before |you imbed SYSPUB:
..sp;..cc begin
     .sr pubMYhs = number of top title lines desired
     .sr pubMYfs = number of bottom title lines desired
     then define the top and bottom title lines
..cc end
..sp;If you do this, you must define at least one of each.
.section 'Controlling Entries in the Table of Contents'
..ix 2 contents 'controlling what goes in it'
..pp;By default, section (second-level), subsection (third-level), and
subsubsection (fourth-level)
headings are included in the Table of Contents.  You can control the level
of inclusion by setting the value of the "inclusion level", with the
SCRIPT control word
..sp;     .sr pubSWinc = value
..sp;A value of "4" or greater will cause section, subsection, and
subsubsection headings to be included in the Table of
Contents; this is the default.  A value of "1" will cause
chapter and appendix (first-level)
headings to be included, but section,
subsection, and subsubsection headings will be
omitted from the Table of Contents.
..pp;For example, if you wish to have all subsubsection headings omitted
from the Table of Contents, then the SCRIPT control word
..sp;     .sr pubSWinc = 3
..sp;should be specified before the first occurrence of the SYSPUB
command ".subsub".
..pp;If you wish to omit the subsection and subsubsection headings from
the Table of Contents for
a particular chapter (or range of chapters), then specify the SCRIPT
control word
..sp;     .sr pubSWinc = 2
..sp;before the occurrence of the SYSPUB ".chapter" command which
defines the first chapter for which you want them
omitted, and then specify the SCRIPT control word
..sp;     .sr pubSWinc = 4
..sp;at the very end of the chapter (or at the very end of the
last chapter in the range of chapters) for which you want
them to be omitted from the Table of Contents.
.section 'Changing The Numbering Styles'
.subsection 'Parts, Chapters, and Appendices'
..ix 2 numbering parts;..ix 2 numbering chapters;..ix 2 numbering appendixes
..pp;If you do not like the default numbering styles, you can change any or
all by inserting the SCRIPT control words
..sp;..cc 3
     .sr pubPAnar = 'new style'
     .sr pubCHnar = 'new style'
     .sr pubAPnar = 'new style'
..sp;before the first occurence of ".part", ".chapter", or ".appendix"
respectively.  The "new style" must be one of the choices
..sp;..cc 3
     arabic
     roman upper
     theatre       (don't use this for chapters)
..sp;"Theatre" numbering results in the sequence "A", "B", ..., "Z".
.subsection 'Footnotes'
..ix 2 numbering footnotes
..pp;You can force the footnote numbering to be done independent of the
ONLINE or OFFLINE output mode by specifying one of the following before
the first occurence of the ".footnote" command.
Specifying
..sp;     .sr pubfnsup = 'nosup'
..sp;will force the footnote numbers
..ul 1 not;to be generated as superscripts.  Instead, they will be
generated as though the output mode was ONLINE.  Specifying
..sp;     .sr pubfnsup = 'sup'
..sp;will force the footnote numbers to be generated as superscripts even
if the output mode is ONLINE.
.section 'Special Considerations'
..pp;There are a number of things which SYSPUB does internally with which
you may not interfere.
They are presented below in terms of the SCRIPT control words on which
they depend.
.subsection 'Control Word Separator (cw)'
..pp;All SYSPUB commands with the exception of those for footnotes demand that
..sp;     .cw ;
..sp;be in effect.
.subsection 'Control Word Indicator Literal (li)'
..pp;SYSPUB establishes the period (.) as the control word indicator literal
and the comma (,) as the
..ul 1 nobreak;control word indicator literal.
These must be in effect whenever a SYSPUB command is encountered
and also must be in effect whenever several circumstances over which
you have no control
.footnote occur.
SYSPUB causes a number of "internal" commands to be invoked
automatically (for example, at the top of each page, SYSPUB checks to see if
there are any tables or figures to be printed).
.footend
This means that the only time it is
..us safe
for you to change the control word indicator is in the "begin/end" range of
a block of text defined by the ".cc" or ".fk" or ".fn" SCRIPT control words.
Disasterous results will occur in other circumstances.
.subsection 'Remote (rm)'
..pp;SYSPUB issues a "first line of the text area" REMOTE using
..sp;     .rm *
..sp;Therefore, you cannot; nor can you change the TOP MARGIN (tm) value
after you imbed SYSPUB.
.subsection 'Translate on Input (ti)'
..pp;For your convenience, SYSPUB defines
a translate table which will map the digits 0 through 9 into
their superscript equivalents.  All you need to do to take advantage of
this is to use the "set" operand of ".ti" to define an escape
character.
For example, if you specify
..sp;     .ti set #
..sp;as the "translate on input" escape character,
then an input line containing the characters
..sp;     The quantity "x squared" is written as x#2.
..sp;will print on the high-speed line printer as
..ti set #
..sp;     The quantity "x squared" is written as x#2.
..br;..ti set
.subsection 'Underscore, Underscore and Capitalize (us,uc)'
..pp;SYSPUB establishes the vertical bar (|) as the "escape" character
which turns underscoring off and on in the ".us" and ".uc" operand lines,
by issuing a
..sp;     .ud set |
.appendix 'AN ALTERNATE METHOD FOR BIBLIOGRAPHIES'
..ix 2 bibliography
..pp;The material below describes a method for preparing the Bibliography
which is not often recommended because it is cumbersome.
It may not be used with a layout less than MANUAL.
.section 'Entering the Bibliographic Entries'
..ix 2 bibliography entries
..pp;The bibliography, if present in a publication, is placed at the end of the
publication (unless there is an index).
However, to allow you to reference the bibliographic entries with symbolic
references instead of absolute numbers,
the SYSPUB commands to format the bibliography can be entered
immediately after the SYSPUB commands for the title page and immediately
before the SYSPUB command for the preliminary pages (or parts and chapters,
if there are no preliminary pages).
If you do this, you must use the ".bib" command in the form
..sp;     .bib refname
..ix bib
..sp;where "refname" is a unique one- to eight-character "reference name"
which the author assigns.
Bibliographic reference numbers
will be generated automatically and printed to the left of each reference.
.section 'Referencing Bibliographic Entries'
..ix 2 bibliography references
..pp;In the main body of the publication, the "refname"  may be used
to refer to the bibliographic entry by specifying the
"refname" followed by a period followed by a colon followed by
the appropriate page number(s) in the reference.
For example, if "turabian" were the "refname" assigned to the publication by
Turabian (see the Bibliography for this SYSPUB User's Guide), then
it could be referenced in the form
..sp;     .ur Ý&turabian.:182-183¨
..sp;to reference the pages in that publication which describe this method.
The number assigned to the bibliographic entry by the
".bib" command is substituted automatically for "refname" (in this case,
"turabian").
Therefore, if bibliographic entries are added to or deleted from the
bibliography during the writing of the publication, there is no need to have
to worry about using the proper "reference number" in the main body of the
paper.
.appendix 'OTHER SYSPUB REFERENCE VARIABLES'
..pp;The following SYSPUB reference variables may be of some use to you.
..sp
..in 1
..oo 1 pubXXnum
where "XX" is one of the following two-letter combinations:
..sp;..in +5
..fo no
BI   bibliographic entry number
FN   footnote number
CH   chapter number
FI   figure number
PA   part number
PO   point number
SE   section number
SS   subsubsection number
SU   subsection number
TA   table number
..in -5;..sp;..fo
For example, if you want to save the current chapter number for reference
later in the document, then:
..sp
     .chapter 'title of chapter'
     .se thischap = &pubCHnum
          .
          .
          .
     As was previously mentioned in
     .ur Chapter &thischap., we ...
..sp
..oo 1 pubSWprt
contains the current chapter (or appendix), section, subsection,
and subsubsection numbers
as a character string of the form
..sp;..in +5;chapter.section.subsection.subsubsection
..sp;..in -5
..in 10;..oo 1 pubSWtop
is the number of lines to be skipped at the top of the title page, the first
page of the bibliography, the declaration page, and the first page created
by each occurrence of the ".prelim", ".chapter", ".appendix", ".contents",
".tables", ".figures", and ".index" commands.
..ur Its default value is &pubSWtop., but it can be changed by specifying the
..sp;     .sr pubSWtop = number of spaces desired
..sp;SCRIPT control word immediately before invoking the SYSPUB command
to which you want it to apply.  The new value will be used by all of the
above SYSPUB commands encountered thereafter, until you change it again.
..sp;..in 10;..oo 1 pubSWbtw
is the number of lines skipped before a section, subsection, or item, and
before and after a table or figure.  You can change it the same way you can
change "pubSWtop", with the same resultant effect.
..ur Its default value is &pubSWbtw..
.bibliography
.bib scintro
..us Introduction to SCRIPT.
Waterloo:  University of Waterloo Computing Centre, 1977.
.bib
..us MLA Style Sheet.
2nd ed.  New York:  Modern Language Association of America, 1970.
.bib
..us Preparation of Papers in Two-Column Format For IEEE
..us Photo-Offset Publications.
New York:
Editorial Department, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 1974.
.bib
..us Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association.
2nd ed.  American Psychological Association, 1974.
.bib screfcd
..us SCRIPT Reference Card.
Waterloo:  University of Waterloo Computing Centre, 1977.
.bib scref
..us SCRIPT Reference Manual.
Waterloo:  University of Waterloo Computing Centre, 1977.
.bib textcms
..us CMS For Text Processing.
Waterloo:  University of Waterloo Computing Centre, 1977.
.bib thesis
..us Thesis Regulations and Guide.
Waterloo:  University of Waterloo Graduate Studies Office, 1975.
.bib turab
Turabian, Kate L.
..us A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations.
4th ed.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press, 1973.
.bib
Wiles, Roy McKeen.
..us Scholarly Reporting in the Humanities.
4th ed. revised.
Toronto:  University of Toronto Press, 1972.
.bib end
.index 1 'INDEX OF SYSPUB COMMANDS' 2
.index 2 'DEFAULTS, AND HOW TO ALTER THEM'
.contents
.tables
.figures
