Subject:  Jes spool archiver
Date:     Thu, 2 May 2002 10:23:00 -0500
From:     "Thomas G Hutchins" <tom.hutchins@bat.agcocorp.com>
To:       sbgolob@attglobal.net, sbgolob@aol.com

Dear Sam,

        I am sending you 2 files which contain an updated "SHARE"
utility which allows you to list what is on a JES2 offloaded data
set, print any or all the contents of a JES2 offloaded data set
or create a JES2 offloaded data set from multiple JES2 offloaded
data sets.

        We use this to store our product installation printouts to
offloaded tapes.  This spares us from keeping paper copies and
does not use space in the system report archiver.  The utility is
known as "SPOOLSEL" on the SHARE site.  I modified their code to
work in an OS/390 environment.

        Our MIS department is being out sourced by the end of
June 2002.  I had meant to send this sooner but good intentions
go nowhere.  The documentation for using the utility is in the
SRCLIB as $$DOC.  The JCL necessary to assemble and link is in
SRCLIB as SPOOLASM.  You can contact me for now as:

Thomas Hutchins
Sr. OS/390 Systems Programmer
AGCO Corp
1500 N Raddant RD
Batavia, IL
(630) 406-3312
tom.hutchins@bat.agcocorp.com

>From the original note I sent the other System Programmers:

I would like you to consider the following as a standard when
installing a new product or applying maintenance to an existing
one.  We get overwhelmed by the amount of printout that an
install uses.  Some of the printouts will get printed and filed,
but the rest? I have tested the following on many installs.

1. Provide all of your install jobs with a JOBPARM "forms"
   statement. If you forget, don't worry. You can use IOF to change
   the forms name. Use a relevant form for your product: i.e. (
   PANV, Panvalet / SYNC, Syncsort / SMPE, Operating System ).
   LINES=9999 will stop annoying "ESTIMATED LINES EXCEEDED"
   messages.

      /*JOBPARM LINES=9999,FORMS=????

2. Send all of the installation printout to RMT2.  You need it to
   hang around.  And don't use class Q, it disappears in 3 days.
   Class T will stay.

      //jobname JOB (6948),MSGCLASS=T
      /*ROUTE PRINT RMT2

3. When the install or maintenance is finished, use JES2 commands
   or IOF to off load the listings based on the JES2 "form" id to
   tape (3490) and using this data set naming convention:

   SFT1.JES2OFFL.prod.vers.Dyyddd

       prod    -  short form for product generally 4 chars
       vers    -  version reference
       yyddd   -  julian year and date

4. After off loading the tape, go to CA-1 and update the tape
   volser or data set name to an expiration period of CATALOG.
   JES2 will not allow retpd of 99000 for CA-1.

The first 2 qualifiers will allow anyone immediate access to off
loaded listings for any product via DSN or ISPF 3.4 wild carding
without doing extensive catalog searches.

You can IEBGENER the tape to another name to provide a backup
copy.  Still cheaper than paper or filling the $AVRS file.

The listings can be "received" back into the JES2 spool at any
time you need to check something. You always have access to the
listings without keeping mounds of paper.

I have found and updated a program, SPOOLSEL, that can read the
tape and list or print its contents.  See the documentation in
SFT1.CUSTMODS.JES2.SPOOLSEL.SRCLIB($$DOC).  SPOOLSEL resides in
Link listed library, SYS2.LINKLIB.

