Subject:  BASH 4.2 port status
From:     John McKown <john.archie.mckown@gmail.com>
Date:     9/17/2014 8:50 AM
To:       Sam Golob <sbgolob@cbttape.org>

(Note from Sam Golob:  Please see member $$NOTE03.  This file is no
 longer in beta status, and is now "fully functional".)

Sam,

I have a port of BASH 4.2 which is working. Well, mostly. It doesn't
crash, but it doesn't pass all of the tests in the IVP package. I have
copied the "distribution" (executable + support files) to my "sandbox"
z/OS 1.12 system at work. It also seems to work fairly well. A few
people on MVS-OE indicated an interest in being "alpha" testers. I
don't know if you would want to have me package up what I've got so
far and distribute it via the CBT or not.

You might want to took at the README in the library
JOARMC.BASH.DISTRIB and review what I've written so far.

In accordance with the GPL, my source modifications must be easily
available. The entire BASH system, in UNIX, is currently 70,186K in
size. But the executable only portion is only 8,936K in size. This
latter is much smaller. The PDS is currently only 8 cylinders. I was
wondering if it would be a good idea to have two files on the CBT for
this. One would be the executable, the other the source. That way the
people who only want the executable can download a much smaller
package.

In addition to the above, I have a github account. All this source,
much more than is on the z/OS system, is in a public repository there.
If desired, we could just point people to it if they want the source
itself. The repository on github is actually a clone of the entire
BASH project. I am setting things up so that, hopefully, when BASH 4.3
is released, I will be able to quickly merge my 4.2 modifications into
the 4.3 source in order to really reduce the time needed to do the
next port.
The repository is at:
https://github.com/JohnArchieMckown/bash/tree/bash-4.2-zos

-- There is nothing more pleasant than traveling and meeting new
people! Genghis Khan

John McKown

