BWO and RLS from DFSMS  Introduction:

DFSMSdss supports backup-while-open serialization, which can
perform backup of data sets that are open for update for long
periods of time.  It can also perform a logical data set dump of
these data sets even if another application has them serialized.
Backup-while-open is a better method than using SHARE or
TOLERATE(ENQFAILURE) for dumping Customer Information Control
System (CICS) VSAM file-control data sets that are in-use and
open for update. When you dump data sets that are designated by
CICS as eligible for backup-while-open processing, data integrity
is maintained through serialization interactions between CICS
(data base control program), CICSVR (forward-recovery program),
VSAM record management, DFSMSdfp, and DFSMSdss.

CICS maintains recovery data in the form of a date and time-stamp
in the catalog entry for backup-while-open data sets. This
information is not used or processed by DFSMSdss, but it is
dumped and restored to preserve that information for CICSVR. The
recovery data is also printed in selected messages to assist you
in your recovery efforts.

VSAM record-level sharing (RLS) extends the DFSMS storage
hierarchy to support a data sharing environment across multiple
systems in a Parallel Sysplex.  This support is designed
primarily for VSAM data sets used by CICS Online Transaction
Processing (OLTP) applications. VSAM RLS processing involves
support from multiple products: CICS Transaction Server, CICSVR
2.3, and DFSMS/MVS 1.3 or higher.

VSAM RLS is a data set access mode that allows multiple address
spaces, CICS application owning regions (AORs) on multiple z/OS
systems, and jobs to access data at the same time. With VSAM RLS,
multiple CICS systems can directly access a shared VSAM data set,
eliminating the need for function shipping between AORs and file
owning regions (FORs).

CICS provides the logging, commit, and rollback functions for
VSAM recoverable files; VSAM provides record-level serialization
and cross-system caching; and CICSVR provides a data set recovery
function. Whether a data set is recoverable or not determines the
level of sharing that is allowed between applications. For
example:

-   Both CICS and non-CICS jobs can have concurrent read/write
access to nonrecoverable data sets.

-   Non-CICS jobs can have read-only access to recoverable data
sets, concurrent with read/write access by CICS jobs.

You use the LOG data set attribute to define a data set as
recoverable or nonrecoverable.

Restriction: Batch jobs that update recoverable data sets
continue to use non-RLS mode (non-shared resource (NSR), local
shared resource (LSR), global shared resource (GSR) access
modes.) They cannot concurrently update any data set being
accessed in RLS access mode.

VSAM RLS uses the coupling facility (CF) to perform data set
level locking, record locking, and data caching. VSAM RLS uses
the conditional write and cross-invalidate functions of the CF
cache structure, thereby avoiding the need for control interval
(CI) level locking.

VSAM RLS uses the CF caches as store-through caches. When a
control interval of data is written, it is written to both the CF
cache and to DASD.  This ensures that problems occurring with a
CF cache do not result in the loss of VSAM data.

