SAMSC0210
TDFSMS AMS
T-Chapter 2.
T-Condition Codes
EKenneth Tomiak <KenTomiak@KTomiak.org>
Z20180512-148953
*
@IBM Corporation
*
Bdgt2i2a1.pdf: SC26-7394-13: z/OS
BVersion 1 Release 13
BDFSMS Access Method Services for Catalogs
*
NAccess Method Services for Catalogs
N-----------------------------------
NChapter 2. Modal Commands
N-------------------------
NCondition Codes
N---------------
NThe condition codes that are tested in the IF-THEN-ELSE command
Nsequence are:
N
N  0: The function ran as directed and expected. Some informational
N     messages can be issued.
N
N  4: A problem occurred in executing the complete function, but it
N     continued. The continuation might not provide you with exactly
N     what you wanted, but no permanent harm was done. A warning
N     message appears. An example is:
N
N     The system was unable to locate an entry in a LISTCAT command.
N
N  8: A requested function was completed, but major specifications
N     were unavoidably bypassed. For example, an entry to be deleted
N     or altered could not be found in the catalog, or a duplicate
N     name was found while an entry was being defined and the define
N     action ended.
N
N  12: The program could not perform requested function. The program
N      sets this condition code as a result of a logical error. A
N      logical error condition exists when inconsistent parameters are
N      given, when required parameters are missing, or when a value for
N      key length, record size, or buffer space is too small or too
N      large. More information on logical errors that occur during
N      VSAM record processing is in z/OS DFSMS Macro Instructions for
N      Data Sets.
N
N  16: A severe error occurred that erased the remainder of the command
N      stream. This condition code results from one of the following:
N
N      -> The program cannot open a system output data set. (For
N         example, a SYSPRINT DD statement was missing.)
N
N      -> An irrecoverable error occurred in a system data set
N
N      -> An access method services encountered improper IF-THEN-ELSE
N         command sequences.
N
NCondition codes that are tested in the IF-THEN-ELSE command sequence
Nor set by the SET command cannot be passed from one job step to the
Nnext. However, the maximum condition code value established by any
Nprevious functional command or SET command is passed to the operating
Nsystem when the access method services processor returns control to
Nthe system.
* End of WISH.
