SCRDG18
TCICS RDG
T-Chapter 18. LSRPOOL resources
E"Kenneth Tomiak"<CBT_Ken@KTomiak.BIZ>
Z20180514-005516
*
@IBM Corporation
*
Bdfha4h00.pdf
BSC34-7425-00 CICS Transaction Server for z/OS
B-Resource Definition Guide
B-Version 5 Release 3
*
NCICS Transaction Server for z/OS Resource Definition Guide
N----------------------------------------------------------
NChapter 18. LSRPOOL resources
N-----------------------------
NThe LSRPOOL resource defines the size and characteristics of the local
Nshared resources (LSR) pool. The LSR pool is a reserve of data buffers,
Nstrings, and Hiperspace buffers that VSAM uses when processing access
Nrequests for certain files.
N
NA Hiperspace buffer is a high-performance storage area in the MVS
Nimage. This area is used for reading and writing 4 KB pages. The type
Nof Hiperspace used by VSAM resides entirely in expanded storage, which
Nis additional processor storage used only for paging to and from real
Nstorage.
N
NUp to 255 LSR pools can be defined concurrently in the system, each
Nidentified by its LSRPOOLNUM. This LSRPOOLNUM is used to associate a
NFILE with an LSR pool if that file is to use shared resources.
N
NWhen the LSRPOOL definition is installed in the active system, its
Ninformation is stored and used when the pool with the specified ID is
Nnext built. A pool is built when the first file that uses a particular
NLSR pool is opened, and is dynamically deallocated only when no files
Nare currently open against that pool. This means that when an LSRPOOL
Ndefinition is installed into the system it might not take effect
Nimmediately.
N
NCICS sets default attributes if an LSRPOOL is not defined, but you are
Nadvised to define the LSRPOOL anyway, for reasons of performance. In a
Nproduction system, for example, delay might be incurred while pool
Nrequirements are being calculated by CICS. Another possible problem is
Nthat if files are not allocated at the time the pool is built, the
Ndata set names are not known to CICS. In this case, the pool is
built based on the information available, but the subsequent performance
Nof the system can suffer or files might fail to open.
N
NYou can associate the CSD file with a particular LSRPOOL by specifying
Nthe CSDLSRNO system initialization parameter. The default is pool 1;
Nensure that sufficient buffers of an appropriate size are provided to
Npermit the CSD file to be used by CICS. See the CICS System Definition
NGuide for further information about CSDLSRNO and for details about
Ncalculating the buffer requirements for the CSD file.
* End of WISH.
