RPG Tutorial:  What is RPG


RPG is a "program generator" and not a language.  My first mentor
stressed that to me so often, I couldn't start writing anything
about RPG without saying that.  He was such an advocate of RPG
over other programming languages, he insisted that the appeal and
power of RPG was that it was not a complex programming language.
It was a tool that could be quickly and simply used to create
solutions to business needs without getting caught up in language
syntax and internal mechanics.

However, in spite of my mentor's adamant statement to the
contrary, RPG is a programming language with all the requisite
syntax, structure, and rules that accompany any programming
language.  RPG was designed to appeal to that set of people who
were familiar with punched card accounting equipment - collators,
reproducing punches, accounting machines.  These machines were
"programmed" using wires and plug boards.  Data was input with
punched cards.  The extremely simple "programs" that could be
devised for these machines could read a series of cards, collated
with information related to a single entity (a student for
example) in a group of cards, and produce a simple report from
the information.  Much of the terminology in RPG relates to this
origin in punched card methodologies - indicator "switches",
matching records, and control levels, for example.

These accounting machines achieved their results by very
mechanical means.  The plugs and wires used to "program" them
conveyed electrical charges originating from reading data from
punched cards to specific control points in a physical cycle.
The functioning of an RPG program is also related to a fixed
processing cycle.  An individual RPG program effects calculations
and produces output by turning indicators on or off.  The basic
logic of all RPG programs is essentially identical and is defined
by the RPG Logic Flow.

So RPG is a simple language with only a few different types of
input statements.  However, it can be used to produce very
complex programs which do much more than simply produce reports.

