
    RPG Tutorial: Using Tables


Tables are used in RPG to store collections of related data.
Usually, but not always, tables are defined, loaded, and utilized
in pairs.  The first table of a pair contains a list of arguments
that is searched to obtain the location of both the argument
element and the corresponding function element in the related
table.  A simple example of a pair of tables is a list of
department numbers and their related department names:


     Department Number    Department Name

            01               Art
            02               Business
            03               Biology
            04               Chemistry
            05               Economics


It is also possible to define and utilize a single table.  One
use of such a table might be to validate a data field using a
list of possible valid field contents.  The single table of
department numbers could be used to validate that a department
number field contained a valid entry, without the necessity of
loading the corresponding department name table.

A table file is a collection of records that provides all of the
table entries for a particular table.  Table files are associated
with the tables for which they contain entries by utilizing the
File Extension specification.  The organization of a table file
must be sequential.  A table file is identified on the File
specification by placing a T in the File Designation (column 16).

Table files are loaded into main storage from the device on which
they are stored, prior to reading the first record from any other
input or update file defined.  The table files are loaded in the
order in which they appear in the File Extension specifications.
Table files may reside on cards, tape, or disk files.  The rules
for preparing table records are:

    * each record must being with the first table entry of that
      record in position 1
    * all records in the table file, except the last, must
      contain the same number of table entries
    * entries in table file records must be adjacent (no unused
      positions between the entries)
    * entries in table file records must all be of the same
      length
    * when alternating (paired) table files are utilized,
      each record in the file must begin with an entry of the
      same type (argument or function)
    * entries in table file records must not be split from one
      record to another
    * the number of entries in a table file must be exactly equal
      to the number entered in columns 36-39 of the File
      Extension specification

The information in tables may be updated by specifying the table
element as the target of a calculation operation following a
successful LOKUP operation.  The updated tables may then be
written out at the conclusion of the RPG program by specifying a
target file in the To File Name (columns 19-26) of the File
Extension specification.  Although table entries may be updated,
they may not be added.  Entries may be provided to allow for
"expansion" in the table by including "dummy" elements which can
be identified by the data they contain.  These "dummy" elements
may be updated by the program, replacing the elements with valid
data.  The files to receive the updated table elements must be
defined on the File Description specifications as Output (O in
column 15) and Table (T in column 16).




This page was last updated on August 21, 2003.

