Subject:     Update to ISPF ENQ Facility in FILE716
From:        mjt6@daimlerchrysler.com
Date:        Thu, 23 Feb 2006 13:46:43 -0500
To:          sbgolob@cbttape.org

Hi Sam,

I thought you might like to get my updates to the ISPF ENQ
facility in file 716 originally provided by Jim Moore which
accompanied his article in Technical Support.

I've loosened the restictions, so to speak, to allow its use as a
more general ENQ display facility.  The following are the
changes:

1. Removed the restriction that the input must be a DSN; i.e. any
   pattern or no input can be supplied as an "*" is automatically
   appended to the input.  If there is no RNAME input, ALL ENQ's for
   ALL QNAMES are displayed.

2. Updated to allow a larger popup window width of 77 vs. 46.

3. Updated to allow a larger popup window depth of 39 for mod4's
   and 20 for all other devices vs. the original 8.

4. Added LIMIT(0) to the QUERYENQ invocation to override the
   default limit of 5,000 returned table rows.

Due to number 3 above, there are now two panels; one for popup
depth 39 and one for popup depth 20.  It sure would be nice if
the WINDOW specification in the )BODY section of a panel allowed
the use of variables, but that's why the invocation exec I call
ENQ now retrieves variable ZSCRMAXD and sets the appropriate
panel name in a variable passed to the TBDISP facility.  We
already had a facility called WHOHAS; hence the name change to
ENQ.  Assuming the exec name and panel names are OK in a shop,
all that needs to be done to implement is the following:

1. Replace Your_panel_library in the LIBDEF for ISPPLIB with the
   dsn of the shop's panel library to contain the panels.
   (That is: edit the ENQ exec, to put your panel library name in,
   instead of the string, Your_panel_library.)

2. Copy the panels to the panel library referenced in the last
   item.

3. Copy the updated rexx exec to the shop's choice of clist or
   exec library.

4. Enjoy.

One can then enter TSO %ENQ or TSO %ENQ some-pattern (without the
trailing "*") on the command input line to get all ENQ's or all
ENQ's for all QNAMES with an RNAME pattern of some-pattern
respectively.  One can also enter ENQ or %ENQ as a line command
before a DSN in a 3.4 list.

The following attachment is the xmit output file of the pds
containing the ENQ rexx exec and the two panels:

Since the three members are named differently, you could add them
to the existing FILE716 contents adding a note member describing
the above enhancements.

Warmest Regards, Mike

