                       HFSELECT                    Introduction

       HFSELECT is an easy to use parameter-driven high performance
  utility program  that  can  selectively  retrieve, reject, count,
  print and sequence check records of an input file. The selection,
  rejection, etc. can be based  on record contents, record position
  within  a  file,  or  by comparison with another file.  Extensive
  statistics of the input and output files are printed by HFSELECT.

       HFSELECT performs file or record matching of two input files
  and  optionally  can  merge  the  matched records onto a separate
  output file.

       HFSELECT performs VTOC, catalog and PDS  directory  searches
  and outputs formatted records of the results.  It can recursively
  call itself for each dsn/member in these formatted records.

       The program can replace a character string by another within
  a given range  in  a  record.  It can encrypt selected fields  to
  create test files from sensitive or confidential data sets, or to
  convert data from one format to another.

       The  input  file  can be a physical sequential (PS) data set
  (QSAM),  an indexed sequential (IS) data set (QISAM), a VSAM data
  set (VSAM) or a partitioned organization (PO) data set (BPAM).

       The  record  formats for QSAM, ISAM and BPAM input files can
  be  fixed, variable, undefined, blocked, spanned, standard or any
  valid combination  of  these  formats.  All VSAM data sets except
  variable spanned can be processed.  The  input  files are  always
  read sequentially. VSAM files may be read either sequentially  by
  key or by physical sequential RBA.

       Multiple  output  files may be generated, depending upon the
  option  and suboptions selected, and on the JCL. The output files
  may be sequential, VSAM or PDS. Thus HFSELECT may be used to copy
  sequential, PDS or VSAM files,  or  to  convert ISAM, VSAM or PDS
  files to sequential files or  VSAM  files.  In addition, variable
  format files may be converted to fixed format files.  Output file
  LRECLs  and  BLKSIZEs  may  differ from their corresponding input
  files.

       The  output  files  may  be  directed  to any system storage
  device  (tape, disk, etc.), or any or all of the output files may
  be  printed  either unformatted, in character,  character and HEX
  format, or character with a ruler line.

       User exits may be used to modify standard HFSELECT features,
  and also to modify records before and after processing.

       Thus, instead of writing and debugging a program  each  time
  selection of records from  a file is required, HFSELECT steps may
  be  written  in  a  few  minutes to obtain the desired results.
1
                       SUPRDUMP                      Introduction

       SUPRDUMP is an easy-to-use utility print program designed to

        - copy an entire tape volume to one output tape volume
        - print  datasets, in  whole  or in  part, from  any system
          storage  device.
        - show  the characteristics  of  all  data  sets  on a tape
          volume, including  labels, formats (ASCII or EBCDIC)  and
          tapemarks for tapes with blocksizes of up to 65535 bytes.
        - show  the  position  and  attributes  of  files,  and the
          position of tapemarks on tape volumes.
        - print files in hex,  with simultaneous  interpretation of
          each character in both ASCII and EBCDIC format.

       SUPRDUMP  is  parameter-driven, with the parameters coded in
  the  PARM  of  the EXECute statement. All parameters are keywords
  and all have defaults so that none need be explicitly specified.

       Information messages displayed by the program are

        - PARM coded on the EXECute statement
        - Jobname, Stepname and Procstepname of SUPRDUMP job & step
        - output tape characteristics and a summary of copied files
        - DSN  coded on the input file (SYSUT1) DD statement
        - maximum block size in the file
        - minimum block size in the file (excluding the last block)
        - size of the last block on the file
        - total number of bytes in the file
        - total number of blocks in the file
        - for tape, the  sequence  number  of the file on the tape,
            the density, and the recording mode technique
        - serial number  of the volume containing the file
        - change in BLKSIZE messages (with relative block number)
        - RECFM and LRECL of each data set
        - Creation and Expiration dates
        - Approximate tape length of each tape file, and the
            approximate total tape length of all processed files

       The SYSUT1 input file record formats may be fixed, variable,
  undefined, blocked, spanned, standard or any valid combination of
  these formats,  but  the  file must  be physical sequential.  The
  RECFM, LRECL and BLKSIZE of these files need not be known before-
  hand.  One  file  in  print  format (SYSUT2) is generated and one
  output tape volume may be created (TAPECOPY). The printout can be
  in any one  of five display  formats. Variable-length records can
  be  printed  in  readable  form.  It shows all bytes of the block
  including the BDW and the RDW if any.

       An  optional output file can  be coded to capture status and
  sense bytes from reads of tape/cartridge data sets.
