This section is to mention known bugs, outstanding or fixed.

  1.  COPYMODS in its original form would not detect an end-of-tape
      during a write operation properly, for the output tapes.  This
      condition is indicated by the unit exception bit OUTCSW+4,X'01'
      being on.  The original author did not check this bit for a
      normal end-of-tape condition on write of the output tapes.

      Upon detection of this, I bypass the WTOR and don't rewind the
      output tape before close.  I also fixed the message to accurately
      say end-of-tape instead of "data check".  (Level 034)

  2.  Eliminated REWIND before CLOSE for output tapes that ended
      prematurely.  This keeps the data on the tape that was already
      written.  (Level 034)  Fixed this on COPYMODT too.

  3.  I don't think this is a real bug, but when you copy an IEHINITTed
      tape, COPYMODS writes 3 tape marks after the HDR1 (instead of 1
      tapemark--COPYMODS writes 1 T.M. and CLOSE writes 2 more).
      The same result happens if you init new tapes with INITVOLS.
      However, the result is unpredictable.  Sometimes COPYMODS
      writes 2 tape marks, and sometimes 3 tape marks.  I think that
      such a tape is always usable as an initted tape, though.  So
      I'm not worried about this situation.  You can measure the tape
      mark number of an initted tape using the TAPESCAN program (CBT
      Tape File 102).

  4.  At COPYMODS Level 078, a loophole was fixed if no //OUTn DD cards
      were coded in the JCL and READ was not specified in the parms.
      COPYMODS would normally "write" to no output DDNAMES and would
      end normally, when in fact, this is (kind of) an error condition.
      To "fix" this, READONLY was forced in such a case, and a message
      was written to SYSPRINT saying so.

  LVL 081   Fix problem in PARM=STRIP code where a real
            label image in the middle of (non-label) tape
            data was stripped out.

  LVL 082   Fix problem in PARM=STRIP code where an (exactly)
            80-byte tape block would cause no tape mark to be
            written at the end of that current file.  Made
            STRIP diagnostics a separate parm called DGSTRI
            and NODGSTRI, to help detect problems like these
            last two.

