
    I have created a new service for sysprogs to help in the handling
of tapes.  This is a free program, which is an enhancement of the old
COPYMODS program that copies tapes from end to end (File 229 of the
CBT Tape).  Many of you are probably familiar with the old version of
COPYMODS.

    My new version of COPYMODS can optionally read a SL tape and dump
all of its labels to an FB-80 external disk dataset.  My program adds
control cards to the external dataset, to tell you when there is an
"end of label set" condition, so that if the labels are being put
back on an NL version of the same tape, the control cards will cause
a tape mark to be written to the SL output tape(s).  The format of
these control cards is:

----ENDOFLABELHEADER
----ENDOFLABELTRAILER
----ENDOFLABELTRAILEREOV

Currently, these control cards are produced after the COPYMODS program
reads a HDR2, or an EOF2, or an EOV2 label, respectively.

   For your information, the COPYMODS program currently has the
capability of correctly reading a set of all the labels on a SL tape,
and of putting these labels back into an NL version of the same tape.
COPYMODS will not add labels to a tape which is already Standard
Labeled.  (It detects the condition by doing a read of the first block
of the Input tape and looking for VOL1 in the first 4 characters of the
first record.)  You can strip the labels off an SL tape (to make an NL
copy) by using the COPYSLNL program that is provided in the current
version of File 229, available from the "Download Updates" section of
www.cbttape.org .

   So the processing goes as follows:

   1.  Use the LABLDUMP and READ parms of COPYMODS to read an SL tape
and dump the contents of the labels to an FB-80 dataset pointed to by
the LABLDUMP DD card.

   2.  Make an NL copy of the SL tape using the COPYSLNL program.

   3.  Optionally, you can edit any of the fields in your tape label
dataset produced by step 1.  Try and make them conform to IBM Standard
Label formats.  For example, you can change the VOLSER or the dataset
names, or the creating JOB name or job step name.

   4.  Use the LABADDIN parm of COPYMODS to merge your FB-80 set of
labels (pointed to by the LABADDIN DD card) into (up to 16) copies of
your NL tape, to make new SL tapes, containing the new labels.  The
default action of COPYMODS in this case, is to insert the correct block
count for each file, into its corresponding EOF1 label, even if the
block count value in the external EOF1 labels was incorrect.

    That's the current state of the processing.  Now...

    I want to add Standard User Label support to this processing,
because you can see how useful this processing might be, to a sysprog
having to contend with screwy User Labels on a tape.  This would help to
clean up the labels on (a copy of) that tape, and make it usable again.
It would also allow for easier export of the tape data to a site that
doesn't recognize the user label data.

    I hope that this processing will be a useful addition to our bag
of tricks.  For those of you who don't already know, all the programs
in the CBT Tape collection (regular CBT Tape, and CBT Overflow Tape)
are free.

