Subject:  CBT tape SPACE update
From:     EWP
Date:     3/30/2017 3:08 PM
To:       Sam Golob <sbgolob@cbttape.org>

Sam,

Thanks for the response.

The changes are so small, please forgive me for sending them via
screenshot. It is simpler for me and should not violate company
policy about redistributing fully functioning code. I hope it is
easier for you to deal with the changes this way too, rather than
having to detach, file transfer, etc. If not, I apologize. One
final justification: this way, you make the changes to the
existing code base and have the comfort of knowing exactly what
is in it.

There are 2 changes to the SPACE package.

1. Panel SSCSPC02

The error with the original is that the cursor selection that
resolved a number like 21.3G doesn't work correctly for screens
wider than 80 bytes, including plain old MOD 5. The problem stems
from the use of the ISPF dialog variables ZSCREENW and ZSCREENC.
ZSCREENW is the physical width of the screen, 132 in a MOD 5.
ZSCREENC is the position of the cursor within the logical screen.
Because there is no WIDTH and EXPAND in the BODY statement, ISPF
puts an 80-wide pillarbox centered in the physical screen. The
dynamic area then sees only this 80-wide logical area, and
reports the cursor position relative to that 80 wide dimension.
Thus the calculation is off and either gives the value for the
wrong field, or no field.

The simplest solution is to make the panel expand to the full
screen dimension by adding  WIDTH(&ZSCREENW) EXPAND(\\)   to the
BODY statement and then adding \ \to each BODY detail line, as
seen below. Forgive the color coding. That's the best it can do
thanks to the ` char.



I use a custom PCOMM WS file that specifies 101 lines by 160
columns. Here are before and after screen shots when I cursor
select the 21.3G on line 6 .

Before:


After:




2. Program SPACE

The error with the original (which probably only occurs in some
shops, like ours) is that the SMS fields always have N/A, as seen
above. The problem stems from code in member SPACE that looks for
the SYSNAME in an undocumented SMS control block, IGCBCD. In our
system, the SYSPLEX name is what appears, and it differs from any
SYSNAME. SPACE then takes a quick exit from the SMS logic and
shows N/A for both the SMS status and storage group. Since the
comments mention the logic was taken from SHOWZOS, I downloaded
it and ran it. It showed our SYSPLEX name was the only entry in
the IGDBCD.

When I looked at the SHOWZOS source, it used the same logic as
SPACE except that if the SYSNAME was not found, it just used the
first entry. So I made SPACE do the same thing and it fixed the
problem. My changes are marked with 'EWP'.

After both fixes were applied, the display was correct. Changes
are highlighted.

If you feel these are worthwhile fixes, please feel free to
incorporate them in the next release. They are merely fix
suggestions and I make no ownership claims whatsoever.

Best regards,

EWP

