To use VTOCZAP
 From SPF 6
    enter "VZAP" or "VZAP vvvvvv"

Where "vvvvvv" is the VOLSER of the volume
If you omit the volser, VZAP will prompt for a volser

VZAP should display a list of the active DSCBs on the volume.
The first column is the disk address (CCCC-HHHH-RR) of the DSCB.
The second column is the type (1,3, 4.. ) of the DSCB
The third column is the DSN (for format-1s) otherwise blank

Page and/or scroll down to the DSCB you need to display or zap.

Enter a non-blank in the line command and press enter.

The fields in the DSCB will be displayed.

You can enter a "+" (Plus sign) as a primary command to toggle
between the data in a field with a description of the field.


To change a field, you have three choices
  1) end a non-blank as a line command
  2) enter the field's number as a primary command
  3) enter the field's name as a primary command

For example to change the DSN, enter "1" or "DS1DSNAM" or enter a
non-blank as a line command and press enter.

Character fields will be displayed in vertical hex.
You can overtype the character or hex portions to update the field.
Press enter.
Press PF3 to to back to the DSCB display.

Numeric fields will be displayed as overtypeable.
For to zap the record length, enter the field number or "DS1LRECL"
press enter
The record length will be shown left justified.
To change the value, overtype what is displayed.
Press enter.
Press PF3 to to back to the DSCB display.

Fields that are "bit flag" fields are displayed in hex and binary.
The label(s) for the bits are listed with the bits that are "on"
shown with an "X" in the selection, the name highlighted and the
description of the bit's meaning in turquoise.  To turn a bit off,
overtype the "X" with a blank.  To turn a bit on, overtype the blank
with an "X".  Press enter.
Press enter.
The display will update to show you which bit(s) are now on.
Press PF3 to to back to the DSCB display.


The DSCBs are not updated until you exit the utility.  If you decide
to cancel the changes, enter "CAN" or "CANCEL" as the primary command
at the DSCB display and press enter.




If you decide to cancel all the changes, enter "CAN" or "CANCEL"
on the DSCB display.
