
XMITIP User Reference GuidePage 1 of 50            9/30/2003





                   XMITIP User Reference Guide




         SMTP (E-Mail) from OS/390 and z/OS to the World

    Version 4.88                  Revised September 26, 2003












                         Lionel B. Dyck
            Kaiser Permanente Information Technology
                       25 N. Via Monte Ave
                 Walnut Creek, California 94598
                  E-Mail: Lionel.B.Dyck@kp.org


       Table of Contents

Table of Contents                                              2
Introduction                                                   5
Change History                                                 6
Acknowledgements                                               9
Local Customizations                                          10
XMITIP - The Command (syntax)                                 11
    To-Address                                                12
  Other Keywords                                              12
    AddressFile and AddressFileDD                             12
    ASA                                                       13
    BCC                                                       13
    CC                                                        13
    CONFIG                                                    13
    CONFIGDD                                                  14
    DEBUG                                                     14
    EMSG                                                      14
    FILE                                                      14
    FILEDD                                                    14
    FILEDESC                                                  14
    FILENAME                                                  15
    FILEO                                                     15
    FOLLOWUP                                                  15
    FORMAT                                                    15
    FROM                                                      21
    HLQ                                                       21
    HTML                                                      21
    IMPORTANCE                                                21
    IGNORECC                                                  21
    IGNORESUFFIX                                              21
    MACH                                                      21
    MARGIN                                                    22
    MSGDD                                                     22
    MSGDS                                                     22
    MSGQ                                                      22
    MSGT                                                      22
    MSG72                                                     22
    MURPHY                                                    23
    NOCONFIRM                                                 23
    NOIDVAL                                                   23
    NOMSG                                                     23
    NORTFXLATE                                                23
    NOSTRIP                                                   23
    PAGE                                                      23
    PDFIDX                                                    24
    PRIORITY                                                  24
    RECEIPT                                                   24
    REPLYTO                                                   24
    SENSITIVITY                                               25
    SIG                                                       25
    SIGDD                                                     25
    SUBJECT                                                   25
    ZIPMETHOD                                                 25
    ZIPPASS                                                   26
  Supported Symbolic Variables                                27
  Minimum required syntax:                                    27
Usage Notes                                                   28
XMITIP Examples                                               29
  Example 1: Send a PDS Member with No Message                29
  Example 2: Send a message to One Address.                   29
  Example 3: Send a Message with CC and FROM specified.       30
  Example 4: Send a Single PDS Member To One Address.         30
  Example 5: Send a Dataset in Landscape with a 9 point font. 30
  Example 6: Send a Passed Dataset to a List using Blind Copies.
                                                              30
  Example 7: Send a Dataset Using an AddressFile Dataset:     31
  Example 8: Using MSGQ                                       31
  Example 9: Send a SYSOUT file as a Text Attachment:         32
  Example 10: Send a Dataset in RTF Format using ZIP to save
  space                                                       32
  Example 11: Send a Comma Separated Value (CSV) Dataset.     33
  Example 12:  Sample using MSGT                              33
  Example 13: Using a XMITIP Configuration File               34
  Example 14: Sending a Message to a Pager if Job Abnormally
  Ends                                                        34
  Example 15: Splitting a Report into Individual E-Mails based
  on a KeyValue                                               35
XMITIPSP - File Split/Separation Utility                      36
  XMITIPSP Syntax                                             36
  XMITIPSP Control Statements                                 36
    FILENAME                                                  36
    KEYMAIL                                                   37
    KEYPREF                                                   37
    KEYV                                                      37
    MSGDD                                                     37
    MSGDS                                                     37
    MSGSTART                                                  37
    MSGEND                                                    37
    SEPLINES                                                  37
    SEPLOC                                                    38
    SEPPAGES                                                  38
    SUBJECT                                                   38
    TO                                                        38
    XMITIPCONFIG                                              38
  XMITIPSP Required Statements                                39
  XMITIPSP Mutually Exclusive Statements                      39
ISPF Dialog                                                   40
  Batch JCL and XMITIP Generation from the ISPF Dialog        42
  Address List Dialog                                         44
  File Attachment Panel                                       45
  Format Prompting                                            45
XMITIP Tools                                                  47
  ALLOCGDG                                                    47
  MAILFILE                                                    47
  SETSDSFK and XMITSDSF                                       47
  TXT2HTML                                                    48
  TXT2RTF                                                     48
  TXT2PDF                                                     48
  XMITIPED                                                    49
  XMITIPFE                                                    49
  XMITIPPD                                                    49
  XMITBULK                                                    49
Reading the Attachment on the Workstation:                    50


       Introduction

       XMITIP is a mainframe based electronic mail application
       that is capable of sending electronic mail to any valid
       Intranet or Internet address. Along with messages, XMITIP
       can also send mainframe files in one of several different
       file attachment formats. The recipients can be on any
       mail system that connects to the Internet (the world) or
       Intranet (in house). The Simple Mail Transport Protocol,
       or SMTP, is used for sending the mail with data sets
       attached using the appropriate SMTP statements.

       The name, XMITIP, derives from the TSO TRANSMIT command,
       which has an alias of XMIT, and from IP, which stands for
       Internet Protocol. Thus XMITIP is TSO TRANSMIT using the
       Internet Protocol.

       XMITIP can be executed as a step within a batch job,
       under TSO as a command, or under ISPF using a robust ISPF
       interface. It can also be used within an automated
       operations tool to generate messages related to system
       events.

       XMITIP can be used very effectively as a step within a
       batch job to send a report generated by that job via
       electronic mail rather than printing the report. With
       this approach the report will arrive in the intended
       users electronic mail inbox within a few minutes after
       the job completes. This is much faster than waiting for
       the hours for the report to be printed, removed from the
       printer, separated from the other reports that were
       printed at the same time, and then delivered or placed in
       a mail box for pickup. The user can then view the report
       online or print as their needs dictate.

       Some of the features of XMITIP are:
       -     send electronic mail to one or more addresses
       -     send a quick message as a page
       -     send one or more data sets as file attachments in
          one of the following formats: plain text, HTML, Rich
          Text Format (RTF), Portable Document Format (PDF),
          Comma Separated Value (CSV), TSO Transmit (XMIT), and
          binary
       -     supports address lists
       -     supports CC and BCC
       -     supports Priority, Sensitivity, and Importance
       -     The ISPF interface:
          -     field level help for all entry fields
          -     validation of all entered fields
          -     address table for lookup and selection
          -     data set table for multiple data set selection and
            formatting
          -     reports the complete XMITIP command syntax generated
          -     option to create a file with a complete Batch Job
            which can be submitted, browsed, edited, or copied.

       The ISPF interface is an excellent tool to use to model
       the XMITIP usage and once it is working completely then
       the generated command can be integrated into a batch job
       step or TSO application.

       Included with the XMITIP package are several tools that
       can be used to invoke XMITIP from other applications.
       These tools interface to XMITIP from SDSF, from IOF, and
       from other ISPF applications.

       XMITIP is written almost completely in OS/390 REXX, with
       one OS/390 Assembler program that performs the MIME
       (Multipurpose Internet Mail Encoding) used for PDF and
       Binary attachments. The ISPF interface is also written in
       OS/390 REXX using the OS/390 ISPF APIs.

       This is an evolving application and any comments,
       suggestions, or bugs should be reported to the author's e-
       mail (lionel.b.dyck@kp.org). Please indicate the version
       of XMITIP that you are using in any e-mail.

       Change History

       Only major changes will be listed in this section. For a
       complete list of changes see the installation dataset
       member CHANGES.

       o     4.88      9/25/2003
            o     Changed to call TXT2RTF for the RTF conversion
                    processing TXT2RTF is a new external exec
                    provided with the XMITIP package.
            o     Support new IGNORESUFFIX keyword
            o     Support new Read-Only option for FORMAT RTF and
                    ZIPRTF
            o     Support for FORMAT RTF and ZIPRTF Configuration
                    File option
            o     Correct ISPF dialog so that when using the
                    FORMAT prompt in the Attachment table the
                    updates to margins will now be saved in the
                    table
            o     Issue "No Message Test - File Xfer Only" if
                    applicable with antispoof
            o     Support new FOLLOWUP keyword
            o     Support FORMAT ICAL
            o     Support embedded blanks in file attachment name
                    (filename)
            o     Update MSGT to support an escape character of /
                    before \ to allow the \ to be included in the
                    message
            o     Added new File Splitter Utility (XMITIPSP)

       o     4.86      08/03/2003
            o     1 minor fix for bad PDF attachment

       o     4.84      7/20/2003
            o     ISPF Dialog - move Margins from General
                    Settings to PDF and RTF prompt panels
            o     ISPF Dialog - move PDF Index to PDF prompt
                    panel

       o     4.80      6/26/2003
            o     Support OMVS file as the MSGDS.

       o     4.78      5/09/03
            o     Minor end user interface changes.
            o     Correct carriage control bug in rare
                    circumstances with format html and pdf
            o     Add STEPLIB to generated batch JCL if load
                    modules in a STEPLIB

       o     4.76      4/11/03
            o     Change to the ISPF dialog for PAGE processing
               to use the MSG DSN text

       o     4.74      4/08/03
            o     New symbolic of &UDATE to return the date in
                    mmddyy format.
            o     Support PAGE via the ISPF Dialog
                    Code PAGE as the only text in Subject and a
                    popup will ask for the message text and then
                    generate a page e-mail
            o     New Warning or Error message is the input data
               records exceed 998 characters per record which is
               the RFC limit. The IBM Server limit is 1024. This
               is an installation defined option to Ignore, Warn,
               or Terminate with an Error.
            o     Added a section on Usage Notes.

       o     4.72      3/28/03
            o     Correct CONDCODE coding bug (mine and not the
               contributors)
            o     Correct Message format HTML to work properly in
               all clients and support file attachment(s)
               properly.

       o     4.70      03/14/03
            o     New &jobnum symbolic for use where other
               symbolics are allowed
            o     New &rc and &rca symbolics are now supported
            o     New PAGE keyword that functions like SUBJECT
               but is used to send a short message to a pager

       o     4.68      02/14/03
            o     New &month symbolic for use in subject, etc.
            o     Correct issue where print without spacing
               looses a record for txt and rtf (major bug fix)

       o     4.66      01/10/03
            o     Add new keyword ERRORSTO for some sites that
               desire it
            o     Add new CONFIG keyword to command and ISPF
               dialog to allow a configuration file to be used
               for XMITIP
            o     ISPF Dialog support for creating Configuration
               file with execution mode of Config
            o     Add new CONFIGDD keyword to the command

       o     4.64      12/19/02
            o     multiple minor fixes in 4.64a to 4.64e releases

       o     4.62      09/28/2002
            o     support a default FORMAT syntax for all file
               attachments
            o     new Feedback option by entering Feedback on the
               ISPF command line
            o     fully support e-mail addresses with blanks in
               the addressfiles (was only in keywords)
            o     support TXT2PDF configuration file on the
               FORMAT PDF keyword

       o     4.60      08/26/2002
            o     support for PDF security on the FORMAT PDF and
               FORMAT ZIPPDF statements
            o     added message summary (installation option)
            o     by default all trailing blanks are removed from
               the Message text and file attachments.
            o     New option of NOSTRIP to avoid the removal of
               trailing blanks for file attachments.
            o     New NoRTFXlate keyword to bypass adding escape
               characters to RTF fields. Useful only if you have
               imbedded RTF fields in a file.

       o     4.58      08/02/2002
            o     Several  minor corrections to PDF creation
            o     New options in TXT2PDF
            o     Several minor bug fixes to XMITIP

       o     4.56      07/25/2002
            o     Includes rollup of Beta 4.55 level changes
            o     The Empty dataset attachment message is no
               longer in the attachment file but now included in
               the message text.
            o     Support Name-In-Archive for InfoZip usage
            o     Numerous panel changes for color consistency
            o     The ISPF Panel Settings option of NO now works
            o     If input file is a PDF and FORMAT PDF specified
               then don't convert but handle as a binary
               attachment with a pdf suffix
            o     Add option for bold fonts in PDF
            o     Support very long subjects. A subject may now
               be as long as you like.

       o     4.54      05/13/2002
            o     New symbolic of &cdate returns yyyymmdd
            o     New PDF Indexing option thanks to Leland Lucius
            o     Support banner for HTML formats
            o     Added NOCC keyword
            o     Support for sending all or masked members of a
               PDS thanks to John Ellis
            o     If FORMAT XMIT or ZIPXMIT and the input is not
               in TSO Transmit format then use TSO Transmit to
               put it into XMIT format.
            o     Enhanced mime encoding routine

       o     4.53      beta level (never released)

       o     4.52      02/07/2002
            o     Corrected symbolic substitution so that it
               works with all symbolics except those that support
               calculation which are &date, &sdate, and &day
            o     If user has a filedd without a filename then
               now generate a valid filename

       o     4.51      02/06/2002
            o     Correct broken MSGQ processing
            o     Correct broken MSGDS in the ISPF dialog.
            o     Change symbolic substitution for &DATE
               For Subject and MSGT use month, dd, yyyy
               For all other uses use mmddyy
            o     Update to XMITIPPD (by Leland Lucius)
               Correct format so the generated PDF can be
               processed by the Acrobat PDA conversion tool and
               read of the Palm OS PDAs

       o     4.46 to 4.50    01/21/2002
                  Complete redesign of the ISPF interface to

               Simplify the primary XMITIP panel by moving fields
               to other panels.

               New execution mode option of Prompt.  If used will
               act like ISPF but will prompt before leaving the
               ISPF dialog and calling the main XMITIP code to
               generate the e-mail (where the MSGDS * is also
               processed).

               Attachment settings such as attachment name,
               attachment description, and margins are on the
               Attachment Settings panel.  This panel will appear
               if an Attachment DSN is specified on the primary
               XMITIP panel only if the Attachment DSN changes
               from the prior use, or if the settings option is
               requested.

               Delivery settings including Importance, Priority,
               and Sensitivity are now on the Delivery Settings
               panel that is displayed upon request.  If not
               selected then these settings default to null.

               New Edit Message DSN option on the panel and new
               EMSG option in XMITIP.

               If message is > 1 word then create MSGT keyword
               for inline message text.

               Mail Default settings include From, ReplyTo,
               Return Receipt, and Murphy have been moved to the
               Mail Default Settings panel which is only
               displayed upon request.  This panel is also
               displayed if there is no From address defined in
               the ISPF Profile, which would normally only occur
               the first time the ISPF interface is used.

               The optional ZIP password and compression method
               settings are now on a separate popup panel which
               is only displayed if ZIP services are requested by
               an appropriate Format option.

               For HTML color selection the prompt is now for
               background and foreground color separately along
               with validation upon entry.

               Test if input file is in HTML format and if so
               then do not convert to HTML if the FORMAT HTML is
               requested.

               Support new FORMAT options:

               CSV - attach as a comma separated value (CSV) text
                     file.  Must already be in CSV format.

               GIF - attach as a binary graphic interchange
                     format (GIF) file.  Must already be in GIF format.

               XMIT - attach as a binary TSO Transmit (XMIT)
                     format file.  Must already be in TSO Transmit
                     format.

            The text to HTML conversion routine has been
               externalized into REXX Exec TXT2HTML. This allows
               this tool to be used outside the XMITIP
               application and now includes its own ISPF
               front-end as well when called without any
               parameters. See the Section on XMITIP Tools near
               the end of this publication for more information.
               New keyword of MSGT for inline text within the
               command.  If an attachment DSN has no Format then
               test the Filename for a suffix that can be used
               for a format (e.g. xxxx.rtf will use format of
               rtf).
            If an attachment DSN has no Format and no Filename
               then look at the DSN suffix for a format (e.g.
               xxxx.rtf will use format of rtf).
            Additional validation now occurs in the ISPF interface
               before calling the XMITIP routine.
            Symbolics now supported on FILENAME FILEDESC, and
               SUBJECT are:
            &JOB, &SYSID, &USERID, &DATE, &DAY, &JDATE, &SDATE
            Dynamically calculate space requirements for HTML,
               PDF, and ZIP work files.
            Support for metric (centimeters) for margin and
               custom paper sizes if configured by the
               installation (the ISPF tutorial panels will
               reflect inches or centimeters).

       o     V4.00     05/11/2000  Major updates and dialog redesign

       o     V3.00     01/03/2000  Add File attachments for HTML and
           Binary, improve ISPF dialog

       o     V2.00     06/23/1999  Add ISPF Dialog

       o     V1.00     04/15/1993
           Converted XMITVM to XMITIP

       Acknowledgements

       I would like to acknowledge the contributions of the
       following individuals who provided pieces of the XMITIP
       application that you are now installing:

       IBM for significant assistance in answering various SMTP
       issues over the years.

       Dana Mitchell for the Interlink support information.

       Doug Adams for many ISPF table-coding examples, including
       the excellent FIND routines.

       Doug Nadel for the routine to convert a number to include
       commas.

       Felipe Cvitanich for his contributions of the national
       language enablement tools.

       John Ellis for his contributions, including the interface
       to UDSMTP and the code to process all, or selected via
       mask, members of a PDS.

       Leland Lucius for his contributions of the PDF conversion
       routine, the initial routine to do MIME conversion, and
       the time zone detection routine. Most recently for the
       PDF security routines and enhancements to the TXT2PDF
       code.

       L. A. Thomas for taking the time to provide extensive
       suggestions on documents, the ISPF help panels, the ISPF
       dialog, and the processing of the application.

       Mark Regan for setting up the XMITIP Listserv group on
       Yahoo.

       Mark Feldman for the XMITB64 assembler program.

       Mike Porter for the UDSMTP program.

       Ken Tomiak and Barry Gilder for their contribution of the
       REXX routine CONDCODE that is used to capture the step
       completion information for the active job.

       Paul Wells for providing the Murphy (XMITIPMU) REXX
       routine.

       Rich Stuemke for the Machine Carriage Control
       information.

       Wolfram Schwenzer for code to support the characters \{}
       in the RTF files.

       Plus numerous individuals who have performed the task of
       beta testing as well as others who took the time to send
       me comments, suggestions, and bug reports.

       Local Customizations

       Some of the local customizations that you need to be
       aware of are:

          1.    ZIP option

            The ZIP option is enabled and utilizes PKZIP/MVS.
            This utility is only available on a few of the
            systems. Before relying upon this option you should
            verify that the ZIP utility is available on the
            systems upon which your jobs will be executing.

          2.    The Data Set used in batch mode on the //SYSEXEC
            DD depends upon the environment:


             Environment             Data Set Name
             Hawaii                  SYS2.USER.CMDPROC
             National                SYS1.USER.REXX
             Northern                SYS2.REXX.EXEC
             California


       XMITIP - The Command (syntax)

       XMITIP is a normal TSO command and thus must be executed
       while logged in or in batch using the batch terminal
       monitor program (TMP). See the Examples section for
       examples of the JCL, which can be used.  he complete
       syntax is:

       %XMITIP user@address
       or (u1@address u2@address..)
       or *list-id*
       or *
       AddressFile
       AddressFileDD
       BCC user@address
       or BCC (u1@add1 u2@add2 ..)
       CC user@address
       or CC (u1@add1 u2@add2 ..)
       CONFIG filename
       or CONFIGDD ddname
       DEBUG
       EMSG
       FILE dsn
       or FILE (dsn1 dsn2 ...)
       FILEDD ddn1
       or FILEDD (ddn1 ddn2 ...)
       FILEDESC file-description
       or FILEDESC (desc1 desc2 ...)
       FILENAME filename
       or FILENAME (file1 file2 ..)
       FILEO hfs-file-name
       or FILEO (hfs-file-name1 hfs-file-name2 ..)
       FOLLOWUP date
       FORMAT options (see the doc)
       FROM from@address
       HLQ high-level-qualifier
       HTML (for MSGDx only)
       IGNORECC or ASA or MACH
       IGNORESUFFIX
       IMPORTANCE High Normal or Low
       MARGIN Lm/Rm/Tm/Bm
       or MARGIN (Lm/Rm/Tm/Bm Lm/Rm/Tm/Bm ...)
       MSGDS data-set-name
       or MSGDS *
       or MSGDD ddname or MSGQ
       or MSGT
       or NOMSG (if no MSGDS, MSGDD, MSGT or MSGQ)
       MSG72
       Murphy
       NOConfirm
       NoRTFXlate
       NOStrip
       PAGE `page message text'
       PDFIDX row/column/length
       PRIORITY Urgent Normal or Non-Urgent
       RECEIPT receipt@address
       REPLYTO reply@address
       SENSITIVITY Private Personal or Confidential
       SIG dsname or SIGDD ddname
       SUBJECT 'subject text'
       ZIPMETHOD zip-compression-method
       ZIPPASS password for zip files

       The command syntax is keyword or keyword followed by an
       option with no intervening equal sign. If multiple
       options are used then they are enclosed within
       parentheses.
       %XMITIP is the command. The % indicates that the command
       is a REXX Exec and not a compiled command. If entered
       without any parameters either an error message will be
       generated or, if executed under ISPF it will invoke the
       ISPF interface. The command requires a minimum set of
       parameters to function, including a to-address and either
       a message keyword (msgds, msgdd, or msgq) or a file
       attachment (file, filedd, or fileo). Use of msg72 will
       limit the message text to the first 72 columns (to avoid
       sequence numbers).


       To-Address
       The only positional parameter to XMITIP is the To-
       Address, which is the electronic mail address of the
       intended recipient. Note that you do not code To-Address
       rather you code the actual address of the recipient. The
       format of this parameter is:

     -     address
       e.g. first.last@company.com
     -     "name" <address>
       e.g. "First Last" <first.last@company.com>
     -     (address1 address2 .)
       multiple addresses are enclosed with parentheses separated
       by at least one blank
     -     ("name1" <address1> "name2" <address2> .)
       multiple addresses are enclosed with parentheses separated
       by at least one blank
     -     *
       an asterisk is used if you are using the ADDRESSFILE or
       ADDRESSFILEDD keywords to define a distribution list of
       addresses. The single asterisk will result in the To field
       being blank on the users e-mail.
     -     *address-list-description*
       This is similar to the usage of a single asterisk except
       that the text enclosed by the two asterisks will be
       specified on in the To field and will appear in the users
       e-mail.  There must be no blanks between the two
       asterisks.

       The name within quotes, referred to in this document as
       the qualified address, will appear in the users inbox
       rather than the e-mail address.

       Other Keywords
       The remaining keywords used by XMITIP are not positional
       or required. The keywords will be presented in
       alphabetical order below.


       AddressFile and AddressFileDD
       These keywords describe a sequential data set or member
       of a partitioned data set that contains a distribution
       list of addresses. The syntax is:

             ADDRESSFILE data-set-name
             Or
             ADDRESSFILEDD ddname

       The format of the address list is:

       Column 1:   * for a comment or an action (To, CC, or BCC)

       Started one blank after the action is a valid e-mail
       address (See the recipient address description for the
       allowed formats).

       Example:

            * Sample XMITIP AddressFile
            Address List
            To first.last@dummy.com
            Cc second.last@dummy.com
            Bcc third.last3@dummy.org
            Cc "Fourth Last"
            <fourth.last@dummy.com>

       Note that the address list is case insensitive. The text
       can be all upper case, all lower case, or mixed case with
       no problems.

       Use of qualified addresses is also allowed.

       ASA
       ASA instructs XMITIP to assume that the file attachments
       contain ASA carriage control.  The default is to use the
       carriage control defined in the DCB of the input data
       set. This keyword should be used if FILEDD is used and
       refers to a data set on VIO.
       (see MACH and IGNORECC).

       BCC
       BCC is the Blind Carbon Copy address keyword. The syntax
       is:

       BCC first.last@dummy.com
       Or
       BCC (first.last@dummy.com second.last@dummy.org
       third.last@dummy.com .)

       Note that with the BCC the qualified name (within quotes)
       is not required or used.

       CC
       CC is the keyword for Carbon Copy. The syntax is similar
       to that for BCC except that the qualified name may be
       coded as it will be used if provided:

       CC first.last@dummy.com
       Or
       CC "First Last" <first.last@dummy.com>
       Or
       CC ("First Last" <first.last@dummy.com> "Second Last" <
       second.last@dummy.org> third.last@dummy.com .)

       CONFIG
       This option allows the user to define a XMITIP
       configuration file containing XMITIP keywords and options
       for the current XMITIP execution. The configuration file
       must be a sequential dataset or a member of a PDS.

       CONFIG data-set-name

       Notes:
          o     Only data in columns 1 to 72 are used (to avoid
            sequence numbers)
          o     A `+' or `-` may be used as a continuation
            character if desired but it is optional
          o     Keywords and options may span records
          o     Any keywords used will over-ride any specified on
            the XMITIP command
          o     Both CONFIG and CONFIGDD may be specified
            multiple times in one command
          o     Both CONFIG and CONFIGDD are recursive (you can
            include them in other configuration files)
          o     The last occurrence of a keyword is the one that
            is used
          o     An * in column 1 indicates a comment

       CONFIGDD
       This option allows the specification of a DDname for the
       XMITIP configuration file for the current execution. See
       CONFIG for details.

       CONFIGDD ddname

       DEBUG
       This option is used when you want to see the generated
       SMTP control statements. The message will not be sent,
       instead every control statement along with the requested
       message and attachments, will be written to the screen
       (for TSO use) or to the SYSTSPRT DD when used in batch.

       EMSG
       This option must be used under ISPF and with a MSGDS dsn.

       FILE
       The FILE keyword describes the sequential data set or
       member of a partitioned data set that will be included
       with the electronic mail as an attachment. The syntax is:

       FILE data-set-name
       Or
       FILE (data-set-name1 data-set-name2 .)

       Note that the data set name may also be a generation data
       set such as hlq.data.set(-2).

       If the data set is a partitioned dataset a member name
       must be specified.  The member name may be a specific
       member name or a mask using a *.  For example:

            AB*   will send all members starting with AB
            *     will send all members

       FILEDD
       The FILEDD keyword describes the DD statements that
       reference the sequential data set or member of a
       partitioned data set that will be included with the
       electronic mail as an attachment. The syntax is:

       FILEDD ddname
       Or
       FILEDD (ddname1 ddname2 .)

       Note that a DDname may be a concatenation of data sets.

       Warning: If FILEDD refers to a temporary data set that
       resides in VIO the file conversion to HTML, RTF, or PDF
       the use of ASA or MACH should be used if the data set
       contains carriage control..

       FILEDESC
       The FILEDESC is a set of characters with no intervening
       spaces that is used to describe the file attachment. Not
       all electronic mail packages support this information so
       it is not frequently used. The syntax is:

       FILEDESC file-description-for-a-single-file
       Or
       FILEDESC (file-description-1 file-description-2 .)

       The FILEDESC value may contain any or all of the
       supported symbolic variables (see list later).

       Note that since blanks are not allowed you can use dashes
       (-) or underscores (_) or other special characters except
       parentheses.

       FILENAME
       The FILENAME keyword describes the name that the data
       sets referenced by FILE, FILEDD, or FILEO will be known
       as when attached to the e-mail. The syntax is:

       FILENAME file1.txt
       Or
       FILENAME (file1.txt file2.rtf file3.pdf .)

       Note that the use of FILENAME will override any suffix
       specified in the FORMAT keyword for the attached file.

       The FILENAME value may contain any or all of the
       supported symbolic variables (see list later).

       If the FILENAME contains embedded blanks then it must be
       enclosed within parenthesis and single quotes.

             e.g.  FILENAME (`sample file.txt')
             or    FILENAME(`sample file.txt' `file 2.pdf'
             file3.txt)

       FILEO
       The FILEO keyword describes a data set which resides
       within an MVS Open Edition (aka OS/390 Unix System
       Services) HFS. The syntax is:

       FILEO `/etc/profile'
       Or
       FILEO (`/etc/profile' `/etc/rc.config' .)

       FOLLOWUP
       The FOLLOWUP keyword will generate a Internet Calendar
       (iCalendar) file attachment that will create a ToDo entry
       in the users Calendar or ToDo calendaring tool (assuming
       the mail client supports the iCalendar files). The syntax
       is:

       FOLLOWUP date

             Where date is in the format mmddyy
                   Or +nnn where nnn is the number of days from
       today


       FORMAT
       The FORMAT keyword is the most complex keyword used in
       XMITIP. This keyword defines the formatting that will be
       used for the FILE, FILEDD, and FILEO data sets when they
       are attached to the e-mail.

       Note that all data on the mainframe is stored in the
       EBCDIC character set and is translated to the ASCII
       character set during the transmission. Any data that
       should not be translated should be attached in Binary
       format.

       There must be one format string (type/option) per file
       attachment with the default being a plain text
       attachment. If you want to use the same format for all
       file attachments then the type must be proceeded by an *
       (see below in the syntax).

       The syntax is:

       FORMAT type/option
       Or
       FORMAT (type/option type2/option2 .)
       Or
       FORMAT *type/option           indicates to use this
       format for all file attachments

       FORMAT TXT
       This is the default for any attachment unless another
       format is specified.

       FORMAT CSV
       The input file must be in Comma Separated Value (CSV)
       format and will be attached as a text file attachment
       with a CSV suffix.

       FORMAT BIN
       This format is used when attaching data that should be
       sent without translation.

       FORMAT GIF
       This format is used when attaching a graphic interchange
       format (GIF) binary file. The input must already be in
       GIF format.

       FORMAT ICAL
       This format indicates that an Internet Calendar file is
       being attached. The file suffix for the filename must be
       ics.

       Note that under the ISPF dialog using a * in the file
       attachment field with a format of ICAL will bring up a
       prompting panel to generate the iCalendar file.

       FORMAT HTML
       This format indicates that the file will be converted to
       a basic HTML format that is easily viewed using any Web
       Browser (e.g. Netscape, Microsoft Internet Explorer).
       This option supports several parameters. A null may be
       used in place of a parameter to take a default.  If the
       input file is already in HTML format then no conversion
       is performed and the file is just attached with the
       appropriate information.

       FORMAT HTML/color/suffix/font-size/banner
       Or
       FORMAT HTML/color-color/suffix/font-size/banner

       Color defines the background color of the web page when
       only a single color is specified. When two colors are
       specified then the first color is the background color
       and the second color is the text (or foreground) color.

       The colors that may be used are denoted below. The
       abbreviation is the smallest number of characters that
       uniquely identify the color:

        Color     Abbrevia  Color     Abbrevia
                  tion                tion
        Aqua      A         Navy      N
        Black     Bla       Olive     O
        Blue      Blu       Purple    P
        Fuchsia   F         Red       R
        Gray      Gra       Silver    S
        Green     Gre       Teal      T
        Lime      L         White     W
        Maroon    M         Yellow    Y

       Suffix can be used to define the file suffix that will be
       used for the attached file, but only if no FILENAME
       keyword is specified for this file.

       Font-size defines a relative font size ranging from 1,
       which is extremely small, to 7, which is very very large.
       The font sizes are relative because the user can alter
       the font size defaults within their Web Browser.

       Banner may be Yes or No (or null) and indicates if the
       file-description is to be used as a Banner in the
       generated html document. If there is no file description
       then the file dataset name will be used.

       Example:

       FORMAT HTML/w-bla//4

       This keyword will format a file as HTML with the text
       color white and the background color black. The font size
       will be 4.

       FORMAT PDF
       PDF is short for Portable Document Format and is the file
       format used by the Adobe Acrobat reader. A version of
       Adobe Acrobat is available free for the Linux, Macintosh
       and Windows workstations. The syntax for this is:

       FORMAT PDF/layout/font-size/paper-size/lpi/rpo
       Or
       FORMAT PDF/txt2pdf-configuration-file

       Where:

       Layout defines the paper orientation of Portrait or
       Landscape. These can be abbreviated as just P or L.

       Font-size is the size of the font in points. There are 72
       points to an inch. The default is 9.

       Paper-size defines the width and height of the paper.
       Valid options are Letter (LET), Legal (LEG), A4, and user
       defined widthXheight (e.g. 4x6).

       LPI is lines per inch. The default is 8 lines per inch.
       If the font size is adjusted this value should be
       reviewed.

       RPO, short for Read and Print Only determines if the
       created PDF file will be secure. The syntax for this
       option is:

             No    No security
           40    40-bit security
           128   128-bit security
           or
           nn:upw      where nn is 40 or 128 and upw is the User
           Password required for the user to read the file

       The txt2pdf-configuration-file may be specified as
       DS:data-set-name or DD:ddname. If the ddname option is
       used then the DD will have to be pre-allocated to the TSO
       session or Batch JCL. Use the TXT2PDF ISPF Dialog to
       generate the configuration file for simplicity.

            Important: If using this option then all PDF
            formatting options must be included in the
            configuration file.

       Note: the MARGIN keyword can be used with this format to
       adjust the top, bottom, left, and right margins on the
       page.

       Examples:

       FORMAT PDF/l/9/let/6
       or
       FORMAT PDF/l/9/let/6/40:readpw

       Defines landscape orientation, 9-point font, letter size
       paper, and 6 lines per inch on the first and on the
       second the same formatting with 40-bit encryption and a
       read only password.

       FORMAT RTF
       RTF is short for Rich Document Format and is a common
       document interchange format that can be used by Microsoft
       Wordpad, Microsoft Word, WordPerfect, Star Office and
       other word processors. The syntax for this is:

       FORMAT RTF/layout/font-size/paper-size/ro
       Or
       FORMAT RTF/txt2rtf-configuration-file


       Where:

       Layout defines the paper orientation of Portrait or
       Landscape. These can be abbreviated as just P or L.

       Font-size is the size of the font in points. There are 72
       points to an inch. The default is 9.

       Paper-size defines the width and height of the paper.
       Valid options are Letter (LET), Legal (LEG), A4, and user
       defined widthXheight (e.g. 4x6). Note: the units for the
       Width and Height is defined for each installation and may
       be either Inches or Centimeters. Check with your
       installation support if you are not sure.

       ro is Yes to enable ReadOnly mode or No (or blank) for
       normal Read/Write mode.

       The txt2rtf-configuration-file may be specified as
       DS:data-set-name or DD:ddname. If the ddname option is
       used then the DD will have to be pre-allocated to the TSO
       session or Batch JCL.

            Important: If using this option then all RTF
            formatting options must be included in the
            configuration file.

            Sample RTF Configuration File:

                  CC
                  FONT 9
                  MARGINS .8/.8.5.5

       Note: the MARGIN keyword can be used with this format to
       adjust the top, bottom, left, and right margins on the
       page.

       Example:

       FORMAT RTF/p/9/let

       Defines a document with portrait paper orientation, 9-
       point font, and letter size paper.

       FORMAT XMIT
       This format is used when sending a dataset created by the
       TSO Transmit command. The dataset will be attached as a
       binary file attachment. If the input is not in TSO
       Transmit format then XMITIP will use TSO Transmit to put
       it into XMIT format.

       FORMAT ZIP
       This format will cause the text file to be compressed
       using a ZIP utility (PKZIP/MVS, ISPZip, or InfoZip) if
       installed and available. The syntax is:

       FORMAT ZIP/name-in-archive

       The name-in-archive is used by InfoZip and PKZIP/MVS
       version 2.51 and higher and is similar to the FILENAME
       keyword. If specified the file will be placed in the ZIP
       archive file using this name. The FILENAME keyword is
       used to specify the name the ZIP archive will be known as
       in the e-mail attachment. For InfoZip the name-in-archive
       will have a installation defined high-level-qualifier
       appended to its front.

       FORMAT ZIPBIN
       This format will cause the binary (no translation will be
       performed) file to be compressed using a ZIP utility
       (PKZIP/MVS, ISPZip, or InfoZip) if installed and
       available. The syntax is:

       FORMAT ZIPBIN/name-in-archive

       The name-in-archive is used by PKZIP/MVS version 2.51 and
       higher and is similar to the FILENAME keyword. If
       specified the file will be placed in the ZIP archive file
       using this name. The FILENAME keyword is used to specify
       the name the ZIP archive will be known as in the e-mail
       attachment.

       FORMAT ZIPCSV
       This format will cause the input file, which must already
       be in CSV format, to be compressed using a ZIP utility
       and then attached.  The syntax is:

       FORMAT ZIPCSV/name-in-archive

       The name-in-archive is used by PKZIP/MVS version 2.51 and
       higher and is similar to the FILENAME keyword. If
       specified the file will be placed in the ZIP archive file
       using this name. The FILENAME keyword is used to specify
       the name the ZIP archive will be known as in the e-mail
       attachment.

       FORMAT ZIPGIF
       This format will cause the input file, which must already
       be in GIF format, to be compressed using a ZIP utility
       and then attached.  The syntax is:

       FORMAT ZIPGIF/name-in-archive

       The name-in-archive is used by PKZIP/MVS version 2.51 and
       higher and is similar to the FILENAME keyword. If
       specified the file will be placed in the ZIP archive file
       using this name. The FILENAME keyword is used to specify
       the name the ZIP archive will be known as in the e-mail
       attachment

       FORMAT ZIPHTML
       This format will cause the file to be converted to HTML
       format and then to be compressed using a ZIP utility
       (PKZIP/MVS, ISPZip, or InfoZip) if installed and
       available. The syntax is:

       FORMAT ZIPHTML/name-in-archive/color/font-size/banner

       The name-in-archive is used by PKZIP/MVS version 2.51 and
       higher and is similar to the FILENAME keyword. If
       specified the file will be placed in the ZIP archive file
       using this name. The FILENAME keyword is used to specify
       the name the ZIP archive will be known as in the e-mail
       attachment.

       See the FORMAT HTML description above for the definition
       of the color and font-size parameters.

       FORMAT ZIPPDF
       This format will cause the file to be converted to PDF
       format and then to be compressed using a ZIP utility
       (PKZIP/MVS, ISPZip, or InfoZip) if installed and
       available. The syntax is:

       FORMAT ZIPPDF/name-in-archive/layout/font-size/paper-
       size/lpi/rpo
       Or
       FORMAT ZIPPDF/name-in-archive/txt2pdf-configuration-file

       The name-in-archive is used by PKZIP/MVS version 2.51 and
       higher and is similar to the FILENAME keyword. If
       specified the file will be placed in the ZIP archive file
       using this name. The FILENAME keyword is used to specify
       the name the ZIP archive will be known as in the e-mail
       attachment.

       See the FORMAT PDF description above for the definition
       of the layout, font-size, paper-size, lpi parameters and
       the txt2pdf-configuration-file option.

       FORMAT ZIPRTF
       This format will cause the file to be converted to RTF
       format and then to be compressed using a ZIP utility
       (PKZIP/MVS, ISPZip, or InfoZip) if installed and
       available. The syntax is:

       FORMAT ZIPRTF/name-in-archive/layout/font-size/paper-
       size/ro
       Or
       FORMAT ZIPRTF/name-in-archive/txt2rtf-configuration-file

       The name-in-archive is used by PKZIP/MVS version 2.51 and
       higher and is similar to the FILENAME keyword. If
       specified the file will be placed in the ZIP archive file
       using this name. The FILENAME keyword is used to specify
       the name the ZIP archive will be known as in the e-mail
       attachment.

       See the FORMAT RTF description above for the definition
       of the layout, font-size, and paper-size parameters and
       for the information on the specification for the
       configuration file.

       FORMAT ZIPXMIT
       This format will cause the input file, which must already
       be in TSO Transmit (XMIT) format to be compressed using a
       ZIP utility and then attached. If the input is not in TSO
       Transmit format then XMITIP will use TSO Transmit to put
       it into XMIT format. The syntax is:

       FORMAT ZIPXMIT/name-in-archive

       The name-in-archive is used by PKZIP/MVS version 2.51 and
       higher and is similar to the FILENAME keyword. If
       specified the file will be placed in the ZIP archive file
       using this name. The FILENAME keyword is used to specify
       the name the ZIP archive will be known as in the e-mail
       attachment

       Note: If no FORMAT keyword is used then the format used
       will be determined by:
          1.    looking at the filename suffix (e.g. filename.rtf
            will use format of rtf)
          2.    looking at the attachment dsn suffix if there is
            no format or filename (e.g. dataset.rtf will use
            format of rtf)

       FROM
       The FROM keyword defines the electronic mail address of
       the sender. The syntax is:

       FROM e-mail@address

       The format of the e-mail@address can be seen above under
       the To Address.

       Examples:

       FROM first.last@company.com
       From: "first last" first.last@company.com

       IMPORTANT: This keyword should always be specified and
       should be your personal e-mail address on your official
       electronic mail system. This address will be used if any
       of the To, Bcc, or CC addresses are incorrect and the e-
       mail bounces back. If not used the bounced e-mail will be
       routed to the senders TSO system - and you do not want to
       read e-mail on TSO since there is no good e-mail reader
       on TSO and TSO does not support file attachments.

       HLQ
       This keyword defines a high level qualifier that will be
       used for work data sets used within the XMITIP
       application. This keyword should be used when running
       XMITIP in batch under userids that do not have a TSO
       segment defined. The syntax is:

       HLQ xxxx
       Or
       HLQ xxx.yyy

       HTML
       This keyword has no parameters and simply indicates that
       the text in the MSGDS or MSGDD is coded in HTML or Rich
       Text format. Use this if you want to send text that has
       color, bolding, italics, or different font sizes.

       IMPORTANCE
       This keyword is used to define the importance of the e-
       mail. This tag will cause some e-mail systems to mark or
       flag the e-mail with an importance icon. The syntax is:

       IMPORTANCE parameter

       Where parameter may be one of these values: High, Normal,
       or Low.

       IGNORECC
       Bypass all carriage control processing. The default is to
       use the carriage control defined in the DCB of the input
       data set.
       (see ASA and MACH).

       IGNORESUFFIX
       This keyword will prevent XMITIP from automatically
       adding a FORMAT friendly suffix to the FILENAME if the
       user specified suffix is not appropriate for the
       specified FORMAT.

       MACH
       MACH instructs XMITIP to assume that the file attachments
       contain Machine carriage control.  The default is to use
       the carriage control defined in the DCB of the input data
       set. This keyword should be used if FILEDD is used and
       refers to a data set on VIO.

       (see ASA and IGNORECC).

       MARGIN
       The MARGIN keyword defines the top, bottom, left, and
       right margins for both the PDF and RTF formatted file
       attachments. The syntax is:

       MARGIN left/right/top/bottom
       Or
       MARGIN (left/right/top/bottom left2/right2/top2/bottom2
       .)

       Note: the units for the Margin specification is defined
       for each installation and may be either Inches or
       Centimeters. Check with your installation support if you
       are not sure.

       MSGDD
       The MSGDD defines a DDName that references a sequential
       data set or member of a partitioned data set that
       contains the text to be included in the message portion
       of the e-mail. Its use is mutually exclusive of the other
       MSGxx keywords. The syntax is:

       MSGDD ddname

       Note that the DD statement may be a DD * and/or a
       concatenation of multiple data sets.

       MSGDS
       The MSGDS defines a data set name, sequential or a member
       of a partitioned data set, which contains text that will
       be included in the message portion of the e-mail. Its use
       is mutually exclusive of the other MSGxx keywords. The
       syntax is:

       MSGDS data-set-name
       Or
       MSGDS data-set-name(member)
       Or
       MSGDS omvs.file-name
       Or
       MSGDS *     (under ISPF Only)

       When MSGDS * is used under ISPF the ISPF Editor is opened
       on an empty data set (record length is 72) in which the
       message text may be entered (or copied from another data
       set).

       Note that when using an OMVS file name that the file name
       is case sensitive (e.g. file ABC is not the same as AbC).

       MSGQ
       The MSGQ keyword may be used to pull the message text
       from the TSO Stack. This option is designed to be used
       primarily by automation tools that will QUEUE lines of
       text to the TSO Stack to be sent in a e-mail. Its use is
       mutually exclusive of the other MSGxx keywords. The
       syntax is:

       MSGQ

       MSGT
       The MSGT keyword may be used to include message text
       within the XMITIP command. The message text must be
       enclosed in either single quotes ` or double quotes ". A
       \ may be used to cause the following text to be placed on
       a new line. Any of the supported symbolics may be used
       within the message text.

       MSGT `this is a test of the message text keyword'

       MSG72

       This keyword is used in conjunction with MSGDD , MSGDS,
       MSGQ, and MSGT to limit the data processed to the first
       72 columns. This is useful if the message data contain
       sequence numbers in columns 73 to 80. The syntax is:

       MSG72

       MURPHY
       This keyword will cause a cute or humorous quote to be
       included in the message of the e-mail. It will appear
       after the message text and before a signature. The syntax
       is:

       MURPHY

       NOCONFIRM
       This keyword is useful if you do not want to see the
       XMITIP report. Its use is not recommended. The syntax is:

       NOCONFIRM

       NOIDVAL
       This keyword is dependent upon the LDAP e-mail address
       validation being enabled. If this validation is enabled
       then this keyword will cause XMITIP to not validate any
       of the e-mail addresses specified. The syntax is:

       NOIDVAL

       NOMSG
       The NOMSG keyword is used for documentation purposes
       only. When you are sending a e-mail with a file
       attachment with no message this keyword can be used so
       that others reviewing your command syntax will know that
       you explicitly decided not to send a message with the
       file. The syntax is:

       NOMSG

       NORTFXLATE
       This option should be used only if you have RTF fields in
       your document and you do not want XMITIP to insert escape
       characters in front of them. The syntax is:

       NORTFXLATE

       NOSTRIP
       The NOSTRIP keyword is used to turn OFF the removal of
       trailing blanks in file attachments. This may be
       necessary if the receiving user needs to process the data
       and requires the trailing blanks. The syntax is:

       NOSTRIP

       Usage Notes:

          1.    NoStrip may not work in all environments for
            Format types of HTML, RTF, or TXT.
          2.    NoStrip will always work for Format types of
            Binary, XMIT, and all formats of ZIP.
          3.    NoStrip does not work for Format PDF.

       PAGE
       The PAGE keyword is used to generate a short message to a
       pager and defines the message text to be used with the e-
       mail. The syntax is:

       PAGE `page message text'

       The text must be enclosed in either single (`) or double
       (") quotes. Using a double quote (") on the outside will
       allow the use of a single quote (`) on the inside. The
       size of the paging text is not limited.

       The PAGE may contain any or all of the supported symbolic
       variables (see list later).

       Examples:

       PAGE `message text'
       PAGE "sample message with single quote (`) inside"
       PAGE `JOB &job completed on &date at &time'

       Notes

          1.    That the use of PAGE precludes the use of
            SUBJECT, any of the MSG keywords and any of the FILE
            keywords.
          2.    The recipient address should be to a pager. Many
            paging providers have a e-mail address of the format
            pager-phone- number@paging.provider.com (e.g.
            1115551212@paging.com).
          3.    The &RC symbolic can be useful when sending a
            page about the abnormal completion of a JOB (do not
            use &RCA as it generates too much information)

       PDFIDX
       This keyword defines the indexing information for the
       Adobe Acrobat PDF file attachments.  The syntax is:

       PDFIDX row/column/length

       Where

          Row   The row on the page where the index is to be
          found. If 0 then look on all rows.
          Column      The column where the index is to be found.
          Length      The length of the index

       PRIORITY
       This keyword is similar to IMPORTANCE but some e-mail
       packages flag priority differently than importance. The
       syntax is:

       PRIORITY parameter

       Where parameter is one of these values: Urgent, Normal,
       or Non-Urgent.

       RECEIPT
       This keyword will cause an e-mail to be returned to the
       specified address when the e-mail has been received. Some
       e-mail systems may send the receipt when the e-mail is
       opened, others when it is delivered to the users inbox
       (but not opened yet). The syntax is:

       RECEIPT address

       Where address is the e-mail address to send the RECEIPT.

       REPLYTO
       The REPLYTO keyword can be used when you want any replies
       to the e-mail to be delivered to someone else. The syntax
       is:

       REPLYTO address

       The address is any of the valid electronic mail address
       formats - see the To Address above for address syntax
       information.

       SENSITIVITY
       This keyword is similar to IMPORTANCE and PRIORITY in
       that it will cause a tag to be generated that some e-mail
       packages will use to flag the e-mail. The syntax is:

       SENSITIVITY parameter

       Where parameter is one of these values: Private,
       Personal, or Confidential.

       If this parameter is coded a line of text may be included
       with each e-mail at the beginning r end of the message
       text based upon an installation option.  The line will be
       one of the following:

       This E-Mail is Confidential and is intended for use by
       the recipient(s) only.
       This E-Mail is Company-Confidential.
       This E-Mail is Personal and is intended for use by the
       recipient(s) only.
       This E-Mail is Private and is intended for use by the
       recipient(s) only.

       SIG
       The SIG keyword references a sequential data set or
       member of a partitioned data set, which contains text to
       be used as a signature. The syntax is:

       SIG data-set-name

       SIGDD
       The SIGDD references a DD statement that refers to a
       sequential data set, or member of a partitioned data set,
       which contains text to be used as a signature. The syntax
       is:

       SIGDD ddname

       SUBJECT
       The SUBJECT keyword defines the subject to be used with
       the e-mail. The syntax is:

       SUBJECT `subject text'

       The subject must be enclosed in either single (`) or
       double (") quotes. Using a double quote (") on the
       outside will allow the use of a single quote (`) on the
       inside. The size of the subject is not limited.

       The SUBJECT may contain any or all of the supported
       symbolic variables (see list later).

       Examples:

       SUBJECT `sample subject'
       SUBJECT "sample subject with single quote (`) inside"
       SUBJECT `Report for &date-7 to &date Created on &day at
       &time'

       ZIPMETHOD
       The ZIPMETHOD keyword defines the compression method to
       use if other than the default compression is desired. The
       syntax is:

       ZIPMETHOD value

       The value depends upon the ZIP utility used:

       PKZIP/MVS supports Normal, Fast, Maximum, and Store.
       ISPZIP does not support this option.
       INFOZIP supports values of 0 through 9 (0=store only
       9=max compression).

       ZIPPASS
       The ZIPPASS is currently only supported by INFOZIP and
       PKZIP/MVS. The password may be up to 64 characters in
       length (no blanks allowed because of an XMITIP
       limitation). The syntax is:

       ZIPPASS password-for-zip

       Note: This password is not totally secure. It is not
       approved for high security environments.



       Supported Symbolic Variables

       The following are the supported symbolic variables that
       are allowed in the FILENAME, FILEDESC, MSGTand SUBJECT
       keywords:

          &DATE or &DATE-  replaced by the current date or
          n                current date-n days
                           In Subject and MSGT replaced with
                           month dd, yyyy
                           Other uses replaced with yymmdd
          &DAY or &DAY-n   replaced by the current day of the
                           week or the current day- day of the
                           week
          &CDATE           replaced by
          &JDATE           replaced by the current or calculated
                           Julian date
          &JOB             replaced by the current job name
          &JOBNUM          replaced by the current job number
          &MONTH or        replaced by the name of the current
          &MONTH-n         month or the calculated month
          &RC              replaced by the condition code for the
                           last executed step.
          &RCA             replaced by all of the step completion
                           codes for the job prior to the XMITIP
                           step (not recommended for use with
                           PAGE or SUBJECT).
          &SDATE or        replaced by the current or calculated
          &SDATE-n         short date (mmdd)
          &SYSID           replaced by the current system name
          &TIME            replaced by the current time
          &UDATE or        replaced by the current or calculated
          &UDATE-n         date (mmddyy)
          &USERID          replaced by the current userid
          &XMITVER         version of XMITIP being used

       Minimum required syntax:

       The minimum required syntax is a to-address and a message
       or a file specification.

          XMITIP user@domain.com MSGDS data-set.name

       Or
          XMITIP user@domain.com NOMSG FILE
          data.set.name

       The sample JCL is an execution of the TSO Batch Terminal
       Monitor Program (or TMP). The dash (-) or a plus (+) is
       used to indicate that a continuation follows when a
       command cannot fit on a single card image.

       Data set coding conventions are the same as for any TSO
       Batch TMP invocation. The data set must be fully
       qualified within single quotation marks otherwise the
       userid under which the job is submitted will be appended
       as the high level qualifier. Members of partitioned data
       sets may be distributed as well by coding the member name
       within parentheses as is the common JCL coding standard.

       Note that the command is completely case insensitive.

       Usage Notes

       Some considerations for using XMITIP are:

          1.    Use a SUBJECT to inform the recipient what the
            e-mail is about
          2.    Always use a FROM address which should map to
            your normal e- mail address on your production e-mail
            system. This allows the recipient to easily reply to
            your e-mail address. If you forget a FROM then a
            default FROM is generated using the e-mail address of
            the TSO session or the userid of the Batch JOB.
          3.    The largest record length supported is either 998
            or 1024.  The SMTP standards (RFC 2821) define a
            limit of 998 bytes per record while the IBM SMTP
            limit is 1024 bytes. There is an installation
            customization option for XMITIP that defines which
            limit is enforced.
          4.    Before implementing XMITIP into a production
            process run several tests to verify that the results
            (e.g. the report format) are what you expect.
          5.    Use the ISPF dialog to experiment with the
            various XMITIP options and use the generated XMITIP
            JCL and command as a starting point for a production
            implementation.

       XMITIP Examples

       These examples illustrate some of the capabilities of the
       XMITIP application. The best way to learn about XMITIP is
       to use the ISPF Dialog to experiment. The dialog
       generates a report of the XMITIP command that it
       generated as well as providing a BATCH option which
       generates a data set that you can easily copy for use in
       a batch job or use in a TSO or ISPF application.

       Note: when using XMITIP to e-mail using a distribution
       list that you should use the AddressFile or AddressFileDD
       keywords and data sets. This avoids having a lot of
       addresses in the command itself and eliminates the
       potential of causing a syntax error when changing
       addresses as recipients are added or removed.

       These examples demonstrate using the Batch TMP (Terminal
       Monitor Program) to invoke TSO commands in batch. Some
       things to be aware of are:

       1.    The data set referenced by the //SYSEXEC statement
          is the location where the XMITIP application has been
          installed.
       2.    When the command exceeds one statement it must be
          continued with either a + or a - on the statement
          immediately before the continuation statement.
       3.    The case of the command is not relevant. It can be
          all upper case, all lower case, or mixed case. Note
          that the subject is the only information in which you
          may be concerned about case.
       4.    Not all examples include a FROM keyword, however it
          is always good practice to include this keyword with
          your primary e- mail address coded.
       5.    Use of a - for continuation will yield extra spacing
          which may not be desirable in a long subject while the
          use of the + for continuation will suppress the extra
          spacing.


       Example 1: Send a PDS Member with No Message

       This example will send a member of a partitioned data set
       with no message text and a short subject to 2 users.

       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       %XMITIP (user1@domain.com user2@domain.com) nomsg file -
       `hlq.data.set(member)' -
             from sender@domain.com -
             subject `send a file but no message'


       Example 2: Send a message to One Address.

       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       %XMITIP user@domain.com msgds my.message.text subject -
             from sender@domain.com -
             `urgent message'


       Example 3: Send a Message with CC and FROM specified.

       Sending example 2 with 2 CCs with a From of my primary e-
       mail so questions about what I'm sending can be sent
       there.

       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       %XMITIP user@domain.com msgds my.message.text subject -
             `urgent message' -
             cc (user2@domain.com user3@domain.com) -
             from mynotes@domain.com
       /*


       Example 4: Send a Single PDS Member To One Address.

       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       %XMITIP user@domain.com nomsg file `hlq.data.set(member)'
       -
             from sender@domain.com -
          subject `pds member'
       /*


       Example 5: Send a Dataset in Landscape with a 9 point
       font.

       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //REPORT DD DISP=(OLD,DELETE),DSN=&&RPT
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       %XMITIP user@domain.com nomsg filedd report subject -
             `passed report' -
             from sender@domain.com -
             format rtf/land/9
       /*


       Example 6: Send a Passed Dataset to a List using Blind
       Copies.

       //REPORT EXEC PGM=DOREPORT
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //INPUT DD DISP=SHR,DSN=data.base
       //OUTPUT DD DISP=(,PASS),UNIT=SYSDA,DSN=&&RPT
       /*
       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //REPORT DD DISP=(OLD,DELETE),DSN=&&RPT
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       %XMITIP *report-list* bcc user@domain.com nomsg filedd
       report -
             subject `report distribution' -
             from myname@domain.com
       /*


       Example 7: Send a Dataset Using an AddressFile Dataset:

       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       %XMITIP user@domain.com nomsg file `hlq.data.set(member)'
       -
             subject `pds member' -
             from myname@domain.com -
             Addressfile `hlq.data.set(address)'
       /*

       Where `hlq.data.set(address)' contains the following:

       To user1@domain.com
       CC user2@domain.org
       Cc user3@domain.ca
       Bcc user4@domain.uk

       Example 8: Using MSGQ
       This example demonstrates a REXX Exec that calls XMITIP
       with the MSGQ option.

       /* rexx */

       queue "this is a test 1"
       queue "this is a test 2"
       queue "this is a test 3"
       "%xmitip user@domain.com subject 'test of msgq'" ,
        "msgq from sender@domain.com"

       Example 9: Send a SYSOUT file as a Text Attachment:

       What this example does is:

       o     create a SYSOUT file in DD SYSUT2 using IEBGENER
       o     Execute batch SDSF
       o     set PREfix to the jobname of SDSFTEST
       o     set OWNER to all
       o     invoke Status command
       o     do a Find for the DD we want (SYSUT2)
       o     Print to File (DD) LOGFILE
       o     Then run the batch TMP to execute XMITIP

       //SDSFTEST JOB acct,'Batch Job',CLASS=L,NOTIFY=&SYSUID,
       //    MSGLEVEL=(1,1),MSGCLASS=X
       //GENER EXEC PGM=IEBGENER
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSUT1 DD DISP=SHR,DSN=SYS1.PARMLIB(IEASYS00)
       //SYSUT2 DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSIN DD DUMMY
       //****
       //SDSFBTCH EXEC PGM=SDSF
       //ISFOUT DD SYSOUT=*
       //LOGFILE DD
       DISP=(,CATLG),UNIT=3390,DSN=userid.LOGFILE.LIST,
       // SPACE=(TRK,(30,30),RLSE)
       //ISFIN DD *
       PRE SDSFTEST
       OWNER
       ST
       FIND SDSFTEST
       ++?
       FIND SYSUT2
       ++S
       PRINT FILE LOGFILE
       PRINT
       PRINT CLOSE
       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       %XMITIP user.name@domain.com NOMSG FILE LOGFILE.LIST -
        from myname@domain.com -
        SUBJECT 'TEST WITH IEASYS00'
       DELETE LOGFILE.LIST
       /*


       Example 10: Send a Dataset in RTF Format using ZIP to
       save space

       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       %xmitip user.name@domain.com nomsg file
       'hlq.weekly.report' -
       from myname@domain.com -
       subject 'weekly report' format
       ziprtf/weekly.rtf/port/9/let
       /*


       Example 11: Send a Comma Separated Value (CSV) Dataset.

       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       %xmitip user.name@domain.com nomsg file 'hlq.weekly.csv'
       -
             from myname@domain.com -
             subject `CSV Test File' format txt -
             filename report.csv
       /*

       In this example we are sending a data set called
       `hlq.weekly.csv', which contains comma separated value
       data. We are using the FILENAME keyword to explicitly
       name the file attachment as report.csv so that it will
       arrive with a .CSV suffix.

       An example of a CSV file is:

       01234, 56789, abcd, efgh
       000001, 56.001, "a b c", "abc def"
       ="00001", ="056.001", abc, "abc"

       Here is a snapshot of what this looks like in Excel.



       Note that column A, row 3, and has leading zeros while
       the others cells do not. This is because of the format of
       the input for that cell.

       Example 12:  Sample using MSGT

       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       xmitip your.email@address -
          subject 'IVP2B test message text and symbolics' -
          from your.email@address -
          msgt 'This is a test +
               of the message text keyword +
               \and testing the symbolics +
               \date  = &date and date-2 = &date-2 +
               \sdate = &sdate and sdate-2 = &sdate-2 +
               \udate = &udate and udate-2 = &udate-2 +
               \day   = &day and day-2 = &day-2 +
               \sysid = &sysid \userid = &userid '
       /*

       Notice how the continuation lines are coded. The
       continuation character is the - symbol or the + symbol.
       The quotes around the message text are only found before
       the first character of the text and after the last
       character - not about each line of text.  The \ starts a
       new line. Leading blanks will be included, for example
       after the "This is a test" and before "of the message
       text". To avoid the extra blanks do not indent the
       message text.

       Example 13: Using a XMITIP Configuration File
       //TSOB EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       xmitip your.email@address -
          config test.config.file -
       /*

       In this example the to e-mail address is specified (as it
       is required as the first option of the command) and then
       the configuration file is specified.

       Example 14: Sending a Message to a Pager if Job
       Abnormally Ends
       . . .
       //TEST1 IF (RC > 4 | ABEND = TRUE) THEN
       //MAIL EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC DD DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD *
       xmitip 1115551212@messaging.paging.com +
          page "job &job(&jobnum) has ended abnormally +
                on &date at &time"
       /*
       //    ENDIF

       In this example if the highest return code (RC) for the
       previous steps is greater than 4 or the job abends then
       the message will be generated using the PAGE option and
       an e-mail address of a text pager.

       Example 15: Splitting a Report into Individual E-Mails
       based on a KeyValue

       //* Invoke IEHLIST on the SYSRES Volume *
       //* ----------------------------------- *
       //HLIST   EXEC PGM=IEHLIST
       //SYSPRINT DD DISP=(,PASS),UNIT=3390,SPACE=(TRK,(30,30)),
       //            DSN=&&LIST
       //RESVOL   DD DISP=SHR,UNIT=3390,VOL=SER=sysrex
       //SYSIN    DD *
        LISTVTOC VOL=3390=sysres
       //* -----------------------------------------------------
       ---- *
       //* BATCH TERMINAL MONITOR PROGRAM (TMP) TO EXECUTE TSO
       *
       //* APPLICATIONS IN BATCH.
       *
       //* -----------------------------------------------------
       ---- *
       //TSOB     EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B
       //SYSEXEC  DD  DISP=SHR,DSN=rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD  SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD  SYSOUT=*
       //IEHLIST  DD  DISP=(OLD,DELETE),DSN=&&LIST
       //SYSTSIN  DD  *
       %xmitipsp dd:iehlist dd:control
       /*
       //CONTROL   DD *
       seploc=98/9/1
       keyv=PAGE    1
       keymail=your.email@address
       keyv=PAGE    3
       keymail=your.email@address
       keyv=PAGE   10
       keymail=your.email@address g
       subject=Test splitter report &sepnum
       msgstart
        This is a test message for the XMITIP report
        splitter utility.
       msgend
       xmitipconfig=dd:xmcc
       filename=iehlist&sepnum.rtf
       //XMCC DD  *
       FROM your.email@address +
       FORMAT RTF/land/9/let +
       MURPHY
       /*

       In this example only Pages 1, 3 and 10 will be e-mailed
       out and all other pages will be ignored.

       See the documentation below for details on the control
       statements that are supported by this utility and for
       particulars on how this utility works.

       The XMCC DD in the example is an example of an XMITIP
       configuration file.

       XMITIPSP - File Split/Separation Utility

       XMITIPSP is the XMITIP File Split and Separation Utility.
       It is designed to be executed in Batch using the Batch
       Terminal Monitor Program (TMP). The functions that are
       available with this utility are:

          1.    Split an input file into individual reports to be
            e-mailed based on a Key Value that is found in a
            specific Column and Record location.
          2.    Split an input file into individual reports to be
            e-mailed based on a Key Value that is found in a
            specific Column location in any record.
          3.    Separate an input file into individual reports to
            be e-mailed based on a specific number of lines per
            report.
          4.    Separate an input file into individual reports to
            be e- mailed based on a specific number of pages per
            report.

       XMITIPSP will perform the input file split/separation and
       then internally invoke XMITIP to e-mail the report
       subset.

       An example of using XMITIPSP in Batch can be found in
       Example 15 above on page 33.

       Note: when splitting by Key Value (SEPLOC and KEYV) any
       key values found in the input data set that are not found
       in a coded KEYV statement will be ignored.

       XMITIPSP Syntax

             %XMITIPSP input-file control-file options

       Where:      Input-file is the input data set that
       contains the report to process.
             Control-file is a data set that contains the
       XMITIPSP control statements
             Options may be DEBUG only at this time.
                  If specified then the call to XMITIP will only
                  be echoed on
                  the report.

       Both Input-File and Control-File can be coded as data set
       names or a DD:ddname to provide flexibility.

       XMITIPSP Control Statements

       Control statements start in column 1 and all data
       starting from column 1 to the end of the record will be
       used.

       Comments are indicated by an * in column 1.

       Caution: Beware of sequence numbers.

       FILENAME

       Filename defines the name the file will have when it
       arrives in the users' inbox. The filename may contain any
       of the supported XMITIP symbolics (see page 25) as well
       as the following two symbolics that are unique to
       XMITIPSP:

          &sepval          Replaced by the current KEYValue
          &sepnum          Replaced by the current report subset
                           number

       Syntax:           Filename=report.rtf

       Note that the filename suffix should match the file type
       of any formatting that occurs. For example RTF is the
       suffix when using the FORMAT RTF to convert the file to
       rich text format.

       KEYMAIL

       Keymail defines an e-mail address that will be paired
       with the KEYV statement which must precede the KEYMAIL
       statements. There must be at least 1 KEYMAIL for every
       KEYV statement and may be as many KEYMAIL statements as
       are required.

       Syntax:           Keymail=first.m.last@host.com


       KEYPREF

       The KEYPREF is a prefix that must be found in the key
       value location (SEPLOC) to validate that the field
       contains a key.

       Syntax:           Keypref=prefix

       Note that the prefix is left justified with no trailing
       blanks and is case sensitive.

       KEYV

       The KEYV keyword defines a Key Value that will be tested
       for based on the information provided in the SEPLOC
       keyword. Only one KEYV is allowed per Key Value and all
       KEYMAIL statements that are associated with this KEYV
       must follow immediately in the control data set.

       Syntax:           Keyv=User ABC

       This example demonstrates that embedded blanks may be
       used in a Key Value.

       MSGDD

       MSGDD refers to a DD statement that references a data set
       with message text that will be included in the generated
       e-mail.

       Syntax:           MSGDD=ddname


       MSGDS

       MSGDS refers to a data set that contains the text of a
       message to be included in the generated e-mail.

       Syntax:           MSGDS=data.set.name

       MSGSTART

       MSGSTART indicates that the statements which immediately
       follow are to be used as the message text for the
       generated e-mail:

       Syntax:           MSGSTART

       MSGEND

       MSGEND indicates that the inline message text is
       complete.

       SEPLINES

       SEPLINES is used to indicate how many lines of data are
       to be separated into each report subset to be e-mailed.

       Syntax:           SEPLINES=1000


       SEPLOC

       SEPLOC defines the Key Value location.

       Syntax:           SEPLOC=column/length/row

       Where:      column is the column in the data where the
       Key Value will be found
             length is the length of the Key Value
             row is the physical row (record) on the page where
       the Key Value will be found

       Notes:

           o     Column and Length are required
           o     Row is optional and if not specified the Key
           Value will be tested on every record

       SEPPAGES

       SEPPAGES is used to indicate how many pages of data are
       to be separated into each report subset to be e-mailed.

       Syntax:           SEPPAGES=1000

       Note: the data set must have carriage control so that
       page counting can occur.

       SUBJECT

       The subject will be used with the generated e-mail to
       inform the user what they are receiving.

       The subject may contain any of the supported XMITIP
       symbolics (see page 25) as well as the following two
       symbolics that are unique to XMITIPSP:

          &sepval          Replaced by the current KEYValue
          &sepnum          Replaced by the current report subset
                           number

       Syntax:           Subject=this is a subject

       TO

       To is used with SEPLINES or SEPPAGES to define an e-mail
       address to receive the split reports.

       Syntax:           TO=first.m.last@host.com

       Multiple TO statements are allowed to provide multiple e-
       mail addresses to receive the split reports.

       XMITIPCONFIG

       XMITIPCONFIG refers to a data set or DD which contains
       XMITIP configuration statements.

       Syntax:           XMITIPCONFIG=data.set.name
             or    XMITIPCONFIG=DD:ddname

       See page 12 for more information on the XMITIP
       configuration data set.

       XMITIPSP Required Statements

       The following are the required statements for XMITIPSP
       execution:

       FILENAME
       KEYV with 1 or more KEYMAIL statements
       SEPLOC, SEPLINES, or SEPPAGES
       TO (if SEPLINES or SEPPAGES)
       XMITIPCONFIG

       XMITIPSP Mutually Exclusive Statements

       The following statements are mutually exclusive:

       MSGDD, MSGDS and MSGSTART/MSGEND
       SEPLINES, SEPLOC and SEPPAGES
       SEPLOC and TO

       ISPF Dialog


       The ISPF dialog is a very easy to use and greatly
       simplifies the coding of the XMITIP command, as the
       dialog actually reports on the complete syntax of the
       generated XMITIP command. The BATCH Execution Mode option
       can be used to generate a data set with the XMITIP
       generated command as well as the necessary JCL which can
       be submitted for a batch execution or to be copied into a
       production job's JCL.

       Entry to the ISPF Dialog is via one of the following
       paths:

          1.    The XMITIP command, when entered with no
            parameters and under ISPF, will invoke the ISPF
            dialog.
          2.    The XMITIPI command will directly invoke the ISPF
            dialog.
          3.    The XMITIPFE command (see below for more
            information) will invoke the ISPF Dialog.
          4.    The XMITIPED and MAILFILE commands (see below for
            more information) will invoke the ISPF Dialog.

       The primary ISPF panel for XMITIP is:

       ----------------------------  E-Mail Dialog   4.88  -----
       -----------------------
       Command ===>

       Recipient Address   ===>
       Message DSN or *    ===>
       Edit Message DSN    ===>               Yes or No

       Execution Mode      ===>               I ISPF B Batch C
       Config P Prompt D Debug
       Subject             ===>
       Configuration File  ===>
       Default Settings    ===>               Yes or No

       CC Address          ===>
       BCC Address         ===>
       AddressFile         ===>
       Delivery Settings   ===>               Yes or No
       (FollowUp, Import, Prior, Sens)

       Attachment DSN or ? ===>
       Attachment Name     ===>
       Format (?=prompt)   ===>
                Settings   ===>               Yes or No

                        Field level help available via PF1

       The Execution Mode, which defaults to ISPF, defines
       whether the generated XMITIP command will be executed in
       the foreground under ISPF or if a batch job containing
       the XMITIP command will be generated. See below for more
       information on this.

       An execution mode of Config will cause the generated
       XMITIP keywords and options to be written to the file
       specified in the Configuration File field. If the
       Configuration file already exists then a popup will
       prompt to replace or overlay it or to cancel and return
       to the XMITIP Panel to specify a different dataset name.

       If the Subject is PAGE then the message text entered in
       the Message DSN field will be used for the paging text.
       If there is not enough room in the Message DSN field then
       enter a ? in the Message DSN field and a panel will popup
       allowing the entry of 2 lines of text.

       If option Debug is selected then all processing will be
       performed with the exception that the e-mail will not be
       sent, the user is placed into ISPF Browse on the
       generated e-mail. This option can be used to review all
       of the SMTP and MIME control statements as well as the
       generated HTML and/or RTF tags if generated.

       By entering FEEDBACK, or an abbreviation, in the command
       field the user will be placed into ISPF Edit on a form
       for supplying feedback (problem, question, comment, or
       suggestion) which will be automatically e-mailed when the
       Edit session ends.

       Each field on the panel has field level help available by
       moving the cursor to that field and pressing F1.

       The Default Settings option will bring up the following
       panel to allow you to set your personal defaults: Note
       that you can also select the Mail Settings option the
       following panel will be displayed to allow you to set the
       Mail delivery information:
       ---------------------------  E-Mail Settings ------------
       --------------
       Command ===>

       From Address      ===> your.from@address
       Reply-To Address  ===>
       Receipt Address   ===>
       Signature DSN     ===> signature.dsn
       Murphy            ===> Yes           Yes or No

                          Review/Verify then use PF3 to continue


       If the installation has configured XMITIP to require a
       From address then this panel will display each time that
       the XMITIP dialog is started until the From address is
       filled in. From that point on this will only display upon
       request. After updating the information use PF3 to return
       to the primary XMITIP panel.

       If you are sending a dataset as an attachment, by
       specifying it on the XMITIP primary ISPF panel, then the
       following panel will display if the attachment name
       changes from the prior use, or if the Settings option is
       requested:

       ------------------------  E-Mail Attachment Details -----
       ------------------
       Command ===>

       For Dataset:

       Attachment Desc   ===>
       ZIP Settings      ===>            Yes, No, or Never
       No Carriage Control           ===> No            Yes or
       No (default=No)
       Do NOT Strip Trailing Blanks  ===> No            Yes or
       No (default=No)

                          Review/Verify then use PF3 to continue
       After filling out this information use PF3 to return to
       the XMITIP panel.

       The other panels that are displayed in this dialog are
       discussed below and will only appear if prompting is
       requested using the ? in one of the following fields:

          o     Recipient Address
            a ? will bring up the Address List dialog from which
            you can select/enter To, CC, and BCC recipients
          o     CC or BCC
            a ? will bring up the Address List dialog
          o     Attachment DSN
            a ? will bring up the File Attachment dialog
          o     Format
            a ? will bring up the Format prompting dialog and
            will then return to the XMITIP Panel with the Format
            field filled in with the selected format. This
            behavior is unique to this prompt.

       Batch JCL and XMITIP Generation from the ISPF Dialog

       If the Execution Mode is Batch then the following panel
       will be displayed:

       -----------------------------  E-Mail JOB Submit  -------
       ----------------------
       Select Processing Option: ===>

           B - Browse the generated job
           C - Copy to a data set
           E - Edit the generated job
           J - Change the JOB Statements
           S - Submit the generated job

           Dataset containing the generated job is:
           DSN='userid.xmitip.jcl'

       This allows the user to review the generated XMITIP
       command with the following options:

          B    Browse the generated JCL and XMITIP
               control statements.
          C    Copy the generated JCL and XMITIP
               control statements to another data set.
               You could use this to copy this into a
               JCL library where you can further
               tailor it and then insert into a
               regularly scheduled production job.
          E    Edit the generated JCL and XMITIP
               control statements. This allows you to
               change the JCL statements and the
               XMITIP control statements prior to
               submitting the JCL for batch execution.
          J    Use this option to modify the
               predefined JOB statements that are
               inserted into the generated JCL.
          S    Submit the generated JOB for batch
               execution.

       This is helpful to use the ISPF dialog to build the JCL
       and XMITIP statements for use in a regularly scheduled
       batch job.

       Below is an example of the generated JCL and control
       statements. The first four statements are the JOB
       statements. These statements may be modified while using
       the J option, or using the E (Edit) option. The data set
       name on the SYSEXEC data definition statement is
       dynamically determined based upon the location of where
       the XMITIPI REXX is currently being executed from.

       Menu  Utilities  Compilers  Help

        BROWSE    SYSLBD.SYSLBD.XMITIP.JCL                 Line
       00000000 Col 001 080
         Command ===>
       Scroll ===> CSR
       ******************************* Top of Data
       ********************************
       //SYSLBDN  JOB  acct,'LIONEL
       DYCK',CLASS=L,NOTIFY=&SYSUID,
       //        MSGLEVEL=(1,1),MSGCLASS=X
       //*
       //*
       //*----------------------------------------------*
       //* XMITIP E-Mail JCL generated: 25 Jul 2001     *
       //* Statements 1-4 are reserved for the JOB Card *
       //* Verify all dsnames in the command if not     *
       //* running under the generating userid.         *
       //*----------------------------------------------*
       //XMITIP  EXEC PGM=IKJEFT1B,DYNAMNBR=50
       //SYSEXEC  DD DISP=SHR,DSN=userid.rexx.exec
       //SYSPRINT DD  SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSPRT DD  SYSOUT=*
       //SYSTSIN DD   *
       %xmitip someone@host.com +
               Msgds jcl.cntl(msg) +
               From myemail@domain.com +
               Subject 'Batch Test' +
               Sig XMITIP.SIG +
               Murphy +
               File xmitip.pds(changes) +
               Filename changes.txt +
               Format txt
       /*

       If the execution mode of Prompt is requested then the
       following panel is displayed allowing the user to confirm
       sending the e-mail or cancel sending.

       --------------------------  XMITIP Send Confmrmation  ---
       ----- Row 1 to 8 of 8
       Command ===>
       Scroll ===> CSR

        Enter Yes to confirm Sending ===>      then press the
       Enter key.
        or press PF3 to cancel sending of this e-mail.

         Generated Command:
         %xmitip lionel.b.dyck@kp.org +
                 Msgds * +
                 From lionel.b.dyck@kp.org +
                 Subject 'Test e-mail' +
                 Sig XMITIP.SIG +
                 Murphy

       ******************************* Bottom of data
       ********************************

       If Yes is entered followed by the Enter key then the e-
       mail will be sent. If PF3 is pressed then the e-mail will
       be cancelled.

       Note that the entry of message text for a MSGDS * will
       occur only after this e-mail has been confirmed to be
       sent.

       Address List Dialog

       -------------------------  XMITIP E-Mail Address List  --
       ---------- Row 1 of 1
       Command ===>
       Scroll ===> CSR

        Commands:  Find Insert  Cancel  SaveAF  LoadAF  LookUp
       or S Select B Blind Copy C Carbon Copy D Delete I Insert
       R Revise U Unselect
         AddressFile:  Load B Browse D Delete E Edit R Revise S
       Select

       Sel  Action   Recipients Name
                     E-Mail Address

       _             lionel b dyck
                     lionel.b.dyck@kp.org

       Notes:

       1.    The LookUp option may not be enabled for everyone.
          This option, when available, will allow the user to
          perform a e-mail address lookup using the OS/390 LDAP
          client referencing a LDAP server somewhere in the
          enterprise.
       2.    The SaveAF and LoadAF are used to Save an
          AddressFile or to Load an AddressFile.
       3.    Help is available via the F1 function key.
       4.    Every address specified in the Recipient To, CC, and
          BCC fields will be automatically added to this list for
          future use.

       Addresses may be entered by entering I (for Insert) on
       the command line or in a Sel entry field. The following
       panel will appear to allow you to enter (or change) an
       Address:

       -----------------------  XMITIP E-Mail Address Revision -
       ----------------------
       Command: ===>

         Enter or Revise the Name and Address

            Recipients Name:
            E-Mail Address:


       Note: if the LookUp option is enabled then any address
       that is entered, which is a local address, will be
       validated.

       Addresses are selected by an S, which places the address
       as a To address, by a C, which places the address in the
       CC address, or by B, which places the address in the BCC
       addresses.

       If an address is selected in error a U will unselect it.

       To build an addressfile:

          1.    Select the desired addresses using S, C, or B
          2.    Enter SAVEAF on the command line

       This will create, or update, an AddressFile and at the
       same time pass this data set name to the XMITIP command
       that is being generated.

       The LOADAF command will prompt for an AddressFile data
       set name and will load it into the Address List. The L
       selection command will load the selected AddressFile. New
       addresses will be inserted into the list and all
       addresses in the list which match will be flagged
       appropriately. This allows you to change the contents of
       an AddressFile easily, after which you should use the
       SAVEAF command to make the changes permanent.

       File Attachment Panel

       ---------------------------  XMITIP File Attachment -----
       ----- Row 8 to 8 of 8
        Command ===>
       Scroll ===> CSR

         Commands: Find Insert Cancel or Clear
         Line:     S Select  D Delete  I Insert  U unSelect  or
       overtype to change

        Sel   Dsname
              Filename (that will appear in the e-mail)
              Format (of the file attachment - use ? for
       prompting)
              Description (of the file attachment - no blanks)
              Left   Right  Top   Bottom     Margins in units of
              PDF Index                      row/column/length
        _
       _________________________________________________________
       ____

       _________________________________________________________
       ____

       _________________________________________________________
       ____

       _________________________________________________________
       ____
              ______    ______    ______    ______
              __________________________

       This panel allows you to enter data set names with
       formatting information for those data sets, which you
       will be sending frequently, or when you need to send more
       than one data set. The data sets must be explicitly
       entered by you and are not automatically added to the
       list as addresses are to the Address List.

       There are five lines to each data set entry as described
       by the heading. Additional data sets can be added using
       the Insert command.

       Data sets must be selected to be sent. If a data set is
       selected in error, the U selection command may be used to
       unselect it.

       Field level help is available for each field on this
       panel and a ? may be used in the  format line to bring up
       the format assistance prompting.

       Format Prompting

       There are two levels of format prompting. The first
       prompt is:

       ---------------------  Format Prompt Selection ----------
       -----------
         Command ===>

         Check the format desired for additional prompting (if
       available)

       Format Binary:    ===>                  Format ZIP:
       ===>
       Format CSV:       ===>                  Format ZIPBIN:
       ===>
       Format GIF:       ===>                  Format ZIPCSV:
       ===>
       Format HTML:      ===>                  Format ZIPGIF:
       ===>
       Format ICAL       ===>                  Format ZIPHTML:
       ===>
       Format PDF:       ===>                  Format ZIPPDF:
       ===>
       Format RTF:       ===>                  Format ZIPRTF:
       ===>
       Format Text:      ===>                  Format ZIPXMIT
       ===>
       Format XMIT       ===>

       A non-blank will select the desired level of formatting.
       When appropriate a second level of prompting will occur
       when additional information is needed. An example is the
       RTF prompt:

       -----------------------  Format RTF Prompt --------------
       ------
        Command ===>
        Enter/Verify

         Layout           ===>             Portrait or Landscape
         Font size        ===>             default is 9 (72 = 1
       inch)
         Paper            ===>             Letter, Legal, A4 or
       nnxyy
         Read Only        ===> No          Yes or No for Read
       Only
         Margins - in units of Inches
           Left ===>        Right  ===>
           Top  ===>        Bottom ===>
       Or TXT2RTF Configuration File:
         ===>

       The PDF prompt is shown below:

       --------------------------  Format PDF Prompt -----------
       -----------
       Command ===>
       Enter/Verify

        Layout           ===>                   Portrait or
       Landscape
        Font size        ===>                   default is 9
       (72 = 1 inch)
                                                use sizeB for
       bold (9B)
        Paper            ===>                   Letter, Legal,
       A4 or nnxyy
        LPI              ===>                   Lines per inch
       (default 8)
        Margins - in units ofmeasure
          Left ===> .3     Right  ===> .3
          Top  ===> .3     Bottom ===> .3
        PDF Index        ===>
       row/column/length
        RPO              ===>                   Security (40,
       128, or no)
                                                or 40:userpw
       128:userpw
        Or TXT2PDF Configuration File:         Create using
       TXT2PDF Dialog
         ===>

       And the HTML Prompt:

       -------------------------  Format HTML Prompt -----------
       --------------
       Command ===>
       Enter/Verify

        Background Color ===>              see color
        Text Color       ===>                  chart below
        Font Size        ===>              1 to 7 or null
        Banner           ===>              Yes or No

         Color      Abb   Color      Abb     Color     Abb
       Color     Abb
         Aqua       A     Gray       Gra     Navy      N
       Silver    S
         Black      Bla   Green      Gre     Olive     O
       Teal      T
         Blue       Blu   Lime       L       Purple    P
       White     W
         Fuchsia    F     Maroon     M       Red       R
       Yellow    Y


       XMITIP Tools

       Several tools have been developed that interface to
       XMITIP.

       ALLOCGDG
       This is a TSO command written in REXX that can (1)
       allocate to a specific ddname a relative GDG data set or
       (2) return the fully qualified name of a relative GDG.

       Syntax:

       call allocgdg ddname "'"dsname(-n)"'"
       or
       fullname = allocgdg("*" "'dsname(-n)'")


       MAILFILE
       This tool is designed to be used from the ISPF 3.4 data
       set list or from within another ISPF dialog and will
       invoke the XMITIP ISPF interface and prime the file
       attachment data set name field with the specified data
       set.

       Syntax:

       MAILFILE dsname


       SETSDSFK and XMITSDSF
       These tools make it easy to send a SYSOUT data set as e-
       mail from SDSF. The SETSDSFK (Set SDSF Key) command is
       used to reset the value of the SDSF Function Key 6
       definition so that it will invoke the XMITSDSF command.
       Then to use this tool:

       1.    Get into SDSF from within ISPF
       2.    Select a JOB or an individual data set (ddname)
       3.    Press Function Key 6
       4.    Follow the prompts on the XMITIP ISPF panel to send
          the report as an e-mail attachment.

       The SETSDSFK needs to only be executed once as the
       function key setup is remembered in the ISPF Profile for
       SDSF.

       Syntax:

       %SETSDSFK option

          Option may be:
                            C for CSV
                            H for HTML
                            P for PDF
                            R for RTF
                            T for Text
                            Z for Zip

       Note that the data set created by the action of the
       function key command is only temporary and the XMITSDSF
       will delete that data set upon completion of the e-mail.

       XMITSDSF Syntax:

       %XMITSDSF data-set-name option

          Option may be:    H for HTML
                            P for PDF
                            R for RTF
                            T for Text
                            Z for Zip


       TXT2HTML
       TXT2HTML is a Text to HTML conversion tool.

       Syntax:     %TXT2HTML options

       Valid Options:

               IN input-dataset or IN DD:input-dd
               OUT output-dataset or OUT DD:output-dd
               COLOR color (see XMITIP HTML color for syntax)
               FONT font-size    (from 1 to 7)
               CC Yes or No      (indicates if the input dataset
               has carriage control)
               NOCONFIRM   (turns off all non-critical
               informative messages)
               BROWSE      (browse the report if under ISPF)
               BANNER      Yes or No (to print title as a banner)
               TITLE title text  (must be the last keyword used)

       If called with no parameters then the ISPF interface is
       called.

       TXT2RTF
       This exec is used to convert a text file into a Rich Text
       Format (RTF) file that can be processed by nearly every
       word processor (e.g. Microsoft Word, Microsoft Wordpad,
       OpenOffice OfficeWriter, AbiWord).

       Syntax: %TXT2RTF input output options

       Valid options are:

            CC        Honor Carriage Control
            CONFIG    References a configuration data
                      set or DD:ddname
            FONT      Font size (72 = 1 inch)
            MARGINS   Margins left/right/top/bottom
            METRIC    Use Centimeters for Margins
                      instead of Inches
            NOCC      Ignore Carriage Control
            NOCONFIRM No status messages (run quietly)
            NOXLATE   Do not add escape characters for
                      {}\ characters
            ORIENTATI Paper orientation - Portrait or
            ON        Landscape
            PAPER     Paper size: LETTER, LEGAL, A4, or
                      custom widthXheight
            READONLY  Set the RTF Read-Only flag


       TXT2PDF
       This exec is used to convert a text file into an Adobe
       Acrobat PDF file. See the TXT2PDF documentation for the
       syntax of this command.

       XMITIPED
       XMITIPED is an ISPF Edit command that will take the data
       set name (and member) and invoke the XMITIPFE command to
       bring up the XMITIP ISPF dialog.

       Syntax:     XMITIPED

       XMITIPFE
       This tool is to simplify calling the XMITIP ISPF dialog
       from other ISPF applications. It allows the calling
       application to pass information that will be set in the
       XMITIP ISPF panel for the user. The syntax is:

       Syntax:     %xmitipfe keywords

       Valid keywords:
          To(to-email-address)
          msgds(* for edit or data set name)
          file(attachment data set name)
          filename(attachment name)
          format(format)
          subject(subject text)

       XMITIPPD
       This exec now invokes TXT2PDF.


       XMITBULK

       This exec allows the user to create a sequential file
       with many different e-mails within it.  The syntax is:

       %xmitbulk bulk-dsn FROM from-addr options

       where bulk-dsn is a sequential dataset with contents
       described below.
             From-addr is the sender e-mail address (e.g. FROM
       your.name@company.com)
             Options is HTML (only supported option for now)
       which will send the message
             as enriched text.

       Bulk-DSN data format starting in column 1:

       dd:ddname   indicates that the input dataset is allocated
       to the specified ddname

       or

       TO: to-address
       SUBJECT: subject
       Text
       Text

       Only 1 TO and 1 SUBJECT are allowed.


       Reading the Attachment on the Workstation:


       When reading the attachment in Lotus Notes the user can
       either (1) launch the attachment, which will open the
       attachment in Microsoft Notepad or (2) use, the Lotus
       Notes View option. The default font in both cases will
       probably be a proportional font, which will not present
       the report in a usable manner. To view the report
       properly the user will need to change the default font.
       When using Microsoft Exchange when clicking on the
       attachment you will be asked to open or save it. When you
       select Open the attachment is opened in Microsoft
       Notepad.

       In Microsoft NOTEPAD to change the default font:

             Select EDIT
             Select Set Font
             Select Courier or Courier New
             Select a reasonable font size (e.g. 10)

       In Lotus Notes View to change the default font:

             Click on Document on the tool bar
             Click on Options
             Click on Display
             Click on Font
             Set the font to Courier New and size 9 (these work
       for me)

             ** Note that this technique works only with Lotus
       Notes pre R5 releases.

