 A CICS sign-on program

I read with interest the article in the March 1987 issue of CICS Update on
Multi-function sign-on.  We have a similar program with a few additional
features that may be of interest to readers who are considering writing their
own program.  Our program runs on a CICS 1.6.0 system under VSE and provides an
easy entry into the on-line system, which has been written in NATURAL.

The transaction has been defined in the PCT with the TASKREQ operand, the user
can then access the sign-on screen with a single keystroke.  The sign-on screen
displays the date and time as well as the CICS terminal-id taken from the EXEC
interface block.  This is useful for the Help Desk when problems are reported.

We use some IBM 3180 terminals, and a few applications require the alternative
screen size (27 x 132) to be used.  If one of these applications is requested,
the sign-on program checks that the terminal has the alternative screen size
defined in the TCT and dynamically modifies the TCTTE to indicate that the
alternative screen size is to be used, or outputs an error message if the
terminal cannot be used for the application.

The user numbers consist of three alphanumeric characters plus a calculated
check digit.  We have a large number of users and to define all these in the SNT
is tedious and results in a very large table, so only selected users are defined
to CICS.  The general user numbers are held on a file along with other
information, which is accessible to applications programs.  The file is also
maintained as an applications file.

The sign-on program first validates that the correct user number/check digit
combination has been entered and then searches the user file for the number.  If
the number is on file, then standard default values are set up in the TCTTE for
security codes and priorities;  if the number is not on file the SNT is checked
and security codes and priorities are taken from there if the user is found,
otherwise the user is rejected with an appropriate error message.  This provides
some security because the sign-on transaction is the only one accessible without
sign-on via CSSN and general users cannot use this because they are not defined
in the SNT.

The transactions that are accessible from the sign-on program are defined within
the program itself, this table also contains any parameters that are to be
passed to NATURAL when the application is started.  One of the parameters
dictates that control will be passed back to the sign-on program when the
NATURAL application has finished, the user is signed off by resetting the TCTTE
fields;  the sign-on screen is then displayed again to allow the user to select
another application.

The features described above allow easy access to our on-line system written in
NATURAL but the program is adaptable to systems written in other languages.



Colin Turner
Systems Programmer
Empire Stores PLC (UK)   ) Xephon 1987













