 THE MONITOR - features and experiences


INTRODUCTION

THE MONITOR is a CICS on-line performance monitoring tool that also provides a
collection and reporting facility.  It consists of three components:

%    Batch operation
%    On-line operation
%    Cross system operation.

These components interact insofar as the on-line component does the data
collection as well as the monitoring functions.  The collected data is available
in batch as well as on-line without disabling the data collection.  The
monitoring components are available from within the CICS region or from the
cross-system region.


BATCH OPERATION

Batch operation provides a comprehensive reporting system simply by supplying
detail parameters to the reporting program.  Collection by the on-line region
provides a record for each transaction with approximately 110 fields in each
record.  User data from the transaction can also be put into the record.  Fields
in the collection records are numbered and are reported on simply by specifying
the field number in the line parameter.  A full history can be maintained by
using the supplied batch jobs to select off full or partial data for long term
off-line storage.

As well as the simple field reporting, data can be sorted and summarised or
graphed.  Twenty five sample reports are provided covering such topics as
channel performance, file I/O time breakdown, transaction versus response time
graphs, and exception condition reporting (eg MAXT, AMXT, SOS, Control Interval
splits, Control Area splits, and abends).  A pre-generated report table allows
reports to be run by simply specifying the report number.  A conversion routine
is also supplied to change the collection file data to CMF format to suit users
with existing analysis suites.  Merrill's MXG provides code for putting THE
MONITOR data into a SAS data file.


ON-LINE OPERATION

The on-line operation does the accumulation and analysis of data to create the
collection file records, as well as providing menu-driven functions. User data
from the transactions can be put into the trace table or collection records.
Also supplied are four user exit points during transaction execution.  PF keys
are set up and can be displayed by pressing PF1; however, no help screens appear
to be available.  One level of security can be implemented requiring high access
users to be listed in the control table.  On-line menu options are activity
monitor, graphic displays, performance statistics, storage details, history
collection analysis, and trace facilities.  Most display screens can be set to
refresh themselves automatically over any interval.

The activity monitor consists of a display of the active and suspended task
chains with details of the terminal-id, transaction code, current program, the
last CICS request, and a mnemonic indicating dispatch status.  By selecting any
task, expanded details are given on the resources used and currently in use.
Tasks can also be purged from this screen.

Graphs can be selected from the graphic menu and can be displayed on simple 3270
screens showing any of the 30 supplied graphs with options of multiple graphs
per screen and automatic refresh.  Available graphs include average task
response time, paging rate per second, CICS DSA, CPU consumption, high file and
task responses, DL/I thread and enqueue usage.  User-defined fields in the
collection records can also be graphed.

The performance related statistics consist of totals or averages of 30 items.
These figures include average I/O counts and responses for various CICS I/O,
DL/I pool usage, and high task/file response statistics.

Collection analysis provides details of all transactions to date, allowing
selection by transaction code, terminal-id, exception condition, or time.  A
history file is also maintained allowing the display of CICS summary details for
any number of previous days as well as the current day.

Storage details include a summary panel showing current and historical
statistics such as the number of storage violations, current OSCOR size, the
number of program compressions, region size, and current DSA size.  Other menus
show CICS storage maps including a select panel for 21 different storage areas.
Storage can also be directly addressed and may be changed as required.

Trace facilities provide the ability to set a trace on any terminal or
transaction, collecting application entries and optionally system entries.
Display facilities are provided showing all or selected system, execution, or
application entries simply by pressing different PF keys.  Multiple traces may
be run and they can be stopped by time, by manual intervention, or by reaching a
pre-set count.

File analysis provides for the graphical display of response or activity against
channel, controller-id, volume serial number, or file-id.  This display also has
auto-refresh and covers DBDs as well as VSAM files.


CROSS SYSTEM OPERATION

Cross system operation provides similar facilities to the on-line system, with
the exclusion of the data collection/analysis and trace capabilities.  The main
advantage of the separate region is to provide an overview of all CICS regions
simultaneously, together with the ability to determine and correct problems when
regions are 'locked up'.  PF keys are set-up and liberal help screens are
available. User-defined help screens can also be set up.  Six levels of security
are provided from the control panel for each different application monitored.
User access to the Cross System Monitor can be set up from the control panel or
by using external security.  Sample security interfaces are supplied.

The base menu displays paging, response, task, and I/O statistics for each
active CICS system.  When exceptional conditions are detected in the monitored
regions the region description is replaced with an error message such as FROZEN,
SOS, MAX TASK, or LOOPING.  If necessary, regions can be frozen, swapped in or
out, or made non-swappable.

Other main menus provide control functions, activity displays for each system's
task chains, and storage displays.  The control screens provide details of user
access capability together with limits for graphs and indicator/alarm levels.
Activity screen or storage screen access requires selection of an individual
CICS system.


INSTALLATION

Installation of all components is very simple and appears to be independent of
CICS maintenance levels.  The on-line installation involves defining a VSAM
collection file, adding entries to the PCT and PPT, and changing the SIMODS
parameter in the SIT.  For on-line use, a sample control table is provided which
requires renaming to a suffix the same as the SIT suffix.  This control table
supplies details about collection data and graphing limits.  The batch component
is installed during the on-line installation and includes a sample report table
containing 16 pre-generated reports.



 Cross system installation follows that of the on-line system and requires an
authorised library for installation.  Sample JCL is given for executing as a
job.


EXPERIENCES

After a very easy installation THE MONITOR proved itself during the trial period
when the following problems were found and located:

1    Poor temporary storage response times.  Immediately after CICS start-up
response times were very slow.  Investigation with THE MONITOR on-line revealed
temporary storage was exhausted and programs were waiting for it to be become
available.

2    CICS journal swap problems.  Batch analysis of response times revealed
transactions having up to four-minute response times at various periods during
the day.  Checking the console log revealed operators taking up to four minutes
to reply to journal swap messages (they were unaware of the impact).

3    Long response with conversational tasks.  Investigation revealed
conversational tasks were at the CMXT limit most of the day, inhibiting new
tasks commencing.

4    Effect of ATIs on MXT. Automatically started tasks in large numbers caused
a situation in which the MXT limit was reached, seriously affecting performance
of all transactions.

5    Temporary storage queues.  Temporary storage (main) queues were supposed to
be deleted at the end of the transaction by the application.  A browse of the
temporary storage queues via THE MONITOR on-line revealed they were not and were
responsible for the use of large amounts of DSA storage.

6    Transient data usage at start-up. A browse of THE MONITOR on-line revealed
transient data was 97% used at start-up.  Increasing this size removed any
chance of problems occurring.

7    High priority transactions.  Batch response analysis revealed transactions
appearing to stall at a particular time of day.  This was traced via a
transaction list to 20 CEMT commands being issued from an external source.
These, having high priority, took control of processing for 20 seconds allowing
other transactions to process only when they had completed.

A large portion of the above problems occurred on CICS 1.5 when queue statistics
were not available.  The Cross System Monitor has proved invaluable as I can now
distinguish between CICS and CPU related hold-ups (with CPU hold-ups The Cross
System Monitor locks up as well !).

Unfortunately, I have not had any experience with alternative on-line products
such as OMEGAMON/CICS, CICSPARS/MVS, or CICS MANAGER.  We chose THE MONITOR in
preference to OMEGAMON/CICS because of the lower cost and easy menu-driven
interface of THE MONITOR.  CICSPARS/MVS and CICS MANAGER were not available at
the time.

Overall, THE MONITOR has proved itself a very valuable tool allowing us to
correct reported problems as well as letting us locate and rectify problems
which we did not know existed.  In some cases specific data analysis cannot be
done with THE MONITOR.  An example of this would be file response by time. A
report listing all files for each time period can be requested, but this cannot
be reported on an individual file basis.  More detailed analysis could be done
by editing the output using SAS or TSO.  More sophisticated reporting could be
done using Merrill's MXG and SAS on the collection file.  Merrill's MXG normally
uses CMF data; however conversion routines are provided for converting to CMF
output.


 We are now looking at using THE MONITOR in conjunction with CICS PLAYBACK as a
stress testing tool.  CICS PLAYBACK will allow us to record CICS screens from
production, modify or replicate them, then re-run them at whatever rate we
desire.  It is intended that THE MONITOR will provide response and bottleneck
analysis for the various runs.



Andrew Wallace
Systems Programmer
Rural & Industries Bank of W Australia (Australia)     ) R & I Bank of W A 1987























































