 More about forward recovery

We would like to add a few points to the excellent article Forward recovery in a
CICS site by Alan Telling in the August 1987 issue.  The comments presented here
address VSAM forward recovery, and the journalling you need to set up in CICS to
accomplish it.


VSE VERSUS MVS

The article states that when you are selecting a VSAM forward recovery product,
you should "take care since the VSE and MVS access methods for VSAM require
separate products".  It may be true that software vendors have separate versions
for VSE and MVS, but this is because of operating system differences, such as
GETVIS/GETMAIN and DTF/DCB macros.  The method of accessing VSAM files is the
same in VSE and MVS.  If a vendor has separate versions for VSE and MVS, both
versions should operate identically within the constraints of the operating
system.


TYPES OF JOURNAL

In the Forward recovery constraints section of the article, Alan points out the
problem of keeping enough journal data to recover multiple days of updates.
However, 'system log' appears to be used as a generic term, which confuses the
issue of what is needed for forward recovery.

This brings up the general topic of what CICS journalling is, and the choices
that are involved.  There are three types of CICS journalling, each with a
different purpose:

%    User journalling is a facility that allows CICS applications to write
journal records in a format determined by the programmer.  The contents and
purpose of this type of journal record are totally up to the design of the
application.  The identifier of the journal file to be used is specified by the
CICS program in the following manner:

     EXEC CICS JOURNAL JFILEID(nn)...

%    Automatic journalling is used by forward recovery systems.  The
JREQ=(WN,WU,...) parameter of a File Control Table (FCT) entry determines the
types of I/O to be journalled, and the JID=nn parameter determines which journal
file to use (DFHJnnA/DFHJnnB).  For forward recovery, Write-New and Write-Update
requests must be journalled.  Read-Only and Read-Update may also be journalled
if you have an off-line need for this information (eg audit trail).

%    Logging is used by emergency restart to back out in-flight transactions.
It contains the 'before' images of files that are defined as protected resources
(LOG=YES in the FCT).  The log always resides on the system journal, DFHJ01A/
DFHJ01B.

Although automatic journalling and user journalling can be directed to the
system journal (01), we do not recommend it.  The system journal only needs to
be large enough to back out in-flight transactions.  If it also contains records
from user and/or automatic journalling, emergency restart will be slowed down as
it passes over these types of journal record.

An additional advantage of separating the system log from other types of journal
is that the system log can then be defined as a single dataset (DFHJ01A) that
wraps around without pausing for the computer operator to respond to a message.
The journals defined for user and automatic journalling should be defined as two
datasets, with JOUROPT=PAUSE to prevent loss of data.


BATCH UPDATES

 Another important recovery consideration is how to recover non-CICS updates to
VSAM datasets.  As Alan points out, most database products provide for the
journalling of batch updates, but VSAM does not.  Thus you need to co-ordinate
VSAM forward recovery, using CICS journals, with re-running any batch update
jobs.  Some forward recovery products have a batch journalling feature for VSAM,
which allows you to combine CICS and batch journals during recovery.

If you use VSAM SHAREOPTION 3 or 4, be aware that even batch journalling does
not guarantee the ability to forward recover a file.  The timestamp that CICS
puts in its journal records provides accuracy only to the nearest tenth of a
second: any batch updates to the same record within the same tenth of a second
will appear to be concurrent to a forward recovery program!  In this event, the
updates may or may not be re-applied in the original sequence.


CONCLUSION

It would seem that recovery should be automatic, or at least provided for by
VSAM. As the vendor of a VSAM forward recovery product, we know that setting up
forward recovery, Dynamic Transaction Backout (DTB) and emergency restart is a
difficult task - especially the first time.

TThe CICS/VS Recovery and Restart Guide (SC33-0235) provides the details of CICS
recovery, and should help you cover all the necessary areas.  Thorough testing
and verification of DTB, emergency restart and forward recovery are necessary.
A few hours of stand-alone test time, when you can interrupt update transactions
by powering down a disk drive or IPLing the system, would be time well spent.
You never know if recovery will work until you try it.  Don't wait until you
need it.



Software Products Group
Davis, Thomas & Associates Inc (USA)    ) Davis, Thomas & Associates 1987
































