 An analysis of CICS/VM

IBM has at last bowed to pressure from VM user groups and announced CICS/VM in
response to the constant demand for a native VM CICS product rather than one
which requires a VSE or MVS guest machine.  The same user groups will probably
not, however, be too overjoyed at the prospect of having to wait until the
second quarter of 1989 before they have access to its full range of functions.

Announcing the new product to the UK press at IBM's marketing centre on the
South Bank, London, in October, CICS product manager, Marcia Gillespie, stressed
that CICS/VM wasn't intended to be a replacement for CICS/VS or CICS/MVS
products but was designed primarily to provide a "seamless interface" to CICS
facilities for users in the 9370 distributed processing environment.

CICS/VM will be a subset of the existing CICS products with no support for
'industrial' terminals.  Release 1 will be available in the UK from June, 1988.
It will be a single-user product, which will allow users to develop and test
applications before migrating them to a multi-user system in the shape of
Release 2, which will be available from the second quarter of 1989.
The delay between announcement and delivery could work against IBM.  The Los
Angeles-based Unicorn Systems Company has a similar product available now -
VMCICS - and it could well find that the IBM announcement will stimulate an
interest in its own product.  Clearly the concept of a CICS system running
natively under VM has been given an air of greater credibility and
respectability.

This was certainly the view of Alan Leibert of Alan Leibert Associates, the UK
suppliers of VMCICS.  He welcomed the news and saw it as confirmation that there
was a hole in the market to be exploited and looked on IBM's timescales as an
excellent opportunity for Unicorn Systems to steal a march on its more
illustrious rival.

CICS/VM will be very welcome in the office environment where it will be possible
to execute CICS transactions and current applications (PROFS for example) from a
single terminal.  It will, however, be in multi-9370 systems where IBM will hope
to have the most impact.

By offering CICS/VM as an option of the VM/IS package, IBM will be providing its
customers with easily installable access to on-line transaction processing under
VM.  More importantly, there is an abundance of appropriate user-written and
third-party software, which should run under CICS/VM with little or no
modification.  This will have obvious widespread appeal, but if users are to
expoit this potential fully, IBM must do something to improve VM's
unsatisfactory file sharing even after the improvements announced in VM/SP
Release 6.  Unless the locking mechanism can be implemented at the record level
rather than at the file level, a high degree of contention will result and
performance will suffer.  Significantly, IBM warns of the unsuitability of using
CICS/VM for processing high volumes of transactions.  It is highly probable that
the underlying reason for this piece of advice is the poor file sharing under
VM.

) Xephon 1987














