 BMS SKR enhancement
It is quite common in the pseudo-conversational world of CICS to code a
transaction-id in the top left corner of a screen display.  When the terminal
operator presses ENTER or any of the PF keys, CICS initiates that transaction
and the program can determine which AID key was pressed and act accordingly.
BMS paging support allows a single transaction to output more than one display
screen.  These screen images are stored in a temporary storage queue for
subsequent retrieval and display.  When the user transaction ends, the first
screen in the queue is displayed and the transaction CSPG is established as the
next transaction to be initiated when any AID key (ENTER, CLEAR, PFx, PAx) is
pressed.  Single Keystroke Retrieval (SKR) commands, that are defined in the
SIT, allow the terminal operator to request display of the next, last, previous,
or any specific display page in the temporary storage queue.  While the
temporary storage queue exists and SKR commands are used to view the stored
display screens, you are in a paging session.  So far so good.  So whatUs the
problem?
You cannot initiate a task in the manner described in the first paragraph during
a paging session except by pressing ENTER.  When any PA or PF key is pressed,
CSPG assumes it is an SKR command.  If that AID key is not defined in the SIT as
an SKR command, the message TDFH4128 - Pxx IS UNDEFINED FOR PAGE RETRIEVALU is
displayed on the screen.  The terminal operator can continue with any valid SKR
command and the paging session will continue until ENTER is pressed.  Even CLEAR
does not end the paging session.
It would be useful to be able to initiate whatever transaction is coded on the
currently-displayed screen by pressing a PF key as well as by pressing the ENTER
key.  Currently SKR prevents this.  The solution to this problem is to modify
CICS to behave as though there were no paging sessions whenever an AID key is
pressed, which is not defined as an SKR command in the SIT.  Then, for example,
pressing PF5 during a paging session would cause the transaction specified on
the current screen to be initiated rather than an error message.
The CICS modification to implement this solution is short and simple.  The
program to modify is DFHTPR.  For CICS 1.6, change line 083000 from TBE TPNOCMDU
to TBE TPSKRXTOU.  For CICS 1.5, the change is the same except the line number
is 083200.
As you can see, the change is simple to make.  This change has been successfully
implemented in every release of CICS since 1.3.

James Holler
Little Blue Systems Inc (USA) ) Little Blue Systems Inc 1988



























