 CICS journal exits
CICS provides for journalling of VSAM and DL/I file updates.  These external
files then serve as input to forward recovery programs that must be in-house or
vendor coded.  The problem we faced was to ensure that the journals were in fact
archived when a journal switch occurred.  The reliability of forward recovery is
dependent on properly maintained and archived journals.
IBM has assisted in this process with the implementation of the new journal
facilities available with CICS Release 1.7.  These enhancements are available
for CICS 1.6 through application of a Small Programming Enhancement (SPE) found
in PP41582.  Included in the changes was the ability to utilise two user-
supplied modules - DFHXJCO and DFHXJCC.  These exits gain control when the
journal datasets are opened and closed.
We used these exits to eliminate operator intervention when a journal dataset
was switched.  Also these exits were used to ensure a journal was archived
before being re-used.  To do this, a VSAM archive informational file is built
nightly.  The DFHXJCO exit writes a record as a journal dataset is opened.  When
the dataset is closed, DFHXJCC updates the archive record with time-stamp
information and then submits a started task job to the internal reader.  The
archive job copies the journal to tape and appends it to a disk file.  The last
step updates the archive record with the timestamp information of the archive.
When a journal is being opened, DFHXJCO checks this information before allowing
a journal to be re-used.  On a nightly basis, the archive disk file is copied to
tape and the archive informational file re-initialised.  In this way, we
maintain incremental and full archives of the journals for the day.  A TSO CLIST
is available to view the archive informational file to aid in recovery.
Listed below are the details of the journalling exits.  These exits, along with
the CLIST and miscellaneous programs used, are available on the SHARE tape.
JOURNALLING EXITS DFHXJCO AND DFHXJCC
Both exits allocate a VSAM dataset that maintains archiving information.
Allocation and de-allocation of this dataset is effected via SVC 99 processing
and one dataset is defined for each CICS region.  Apart from one DFHPC
TYPE=RETURN and numerous DFHWTO and DFHMSG macros to communicate with operations
personnel, no CICS macro services are used.  The GENCB macro is used to generate
VSAM ACBs and RPLs.  A procedure to archive the journal dataset is submitted to
the internal reader from the close exit DFHXJCC as a started task.
A number of informative DFHWTO messages have been left in the exits to allow
logic checking on the CICS log.  Additionally, a table to allow selection of the
correct journalling procedure name is searched by DFHXJCO.  This code is
obviously installation dependent and will need to to tailored.
LOGIC FLOW FOR DFHXJCO
DFHXJCO is invoked just prior to opening the journalling dataset.  The logic has
to identify whether initialisation processing or a switch is taking place.
1    Ensure Journal Control Area File Id (JCAJFID) and JCT Table Entry File Id
(JCAJCTTE) are synchronised.
2    Build a VSAM archiving dataset name using the SIT APPLID as the second
qualifier of the DSNAME (eg CICSV. XXXXXXXX.JRNL.ARCHIVE).  Since the
installation has varying APPLID lengths in different regions the TslideU logic
is used.
3    An SVC 99 is issued to de-allocate the archive dataset to ensure
availability in the case of a previous system crash.
4    An SVC 99 is issued to allocate the archive dataset.
5    Generate ACB for archive dataset access.
6    Open archive dataset.
7    Generate RPL for archive dataset access.
8    Check whether in initialisation or switch processing.
9    If an emergency restart is being performed, set archive control indicator
to TEU.
10   If a cold or warm start is being done, set archive control indicator to
TIU.
11   If SWITCH set archive control indicator to TSU.
     The indicator set in steps 9, 10, and 11 enables viewing of how journalling
in the CICS region has performed via a TSO CLIST.
12   If in initialisation processing, a MODCB is issued to set up the RPL for
direct update since a new record is to be written.
13   If in switch processing, the archive dataset is read sequentially forward
until the first hit on a record for the current journal.  This record is checked
 to ensure that a status flag has been set to indicate that the journal about to
be used has been archived before re-using.  If this is the case, a new archive
record is written.  If the status flag is not set, a DFHWTO is issued notifying
the operator that the journal about to be used has not been archived.  The
operator can reply GO or CANCEL up to a maximum of three times.  (Procedurally
the operators were instructed to check for the started archiving procedure
having run successfully before issuing a reply.)  To allow the archive record to
be re-read on each reply from the operator, a CLOSE TYPE=T macro is issued to
ensure that look-aside VSAM processing does not make the same record available
to the exit each time without refreshing the I/O buffer with an updated image.
If archiving is not indicated after three attempts the region is abended.
14   After successful editing, a new archive record is written with the date and
time in the record key 9s complemented to ensure that the first record found for
a journal in a sequential forward read is the most recent.
15   The archive dataset is closed and de-allocated via an SVC 99.
16   DFHPC TYPE=RETURN macro is issued.
LOGIC FLOW FOR DFHXJCC
DFHXJCC is invoked just after closing the journalling dataset.  The logic has to
identify whether initialisation processing, a switch, or termination processing
is taking place.
1    Ensure that JCAJFID and JCAJCTTE are synchronised.
2    Build a VSAM archiving dataset name using the SIT APPLID as the second
qualifier of the DSNAME (eg CICSV. XXXXXXXX.JRNL.ARCHIVE).
3    Perform a table search to match the APPLID and the procedure name for
journalling.  Please note that this is installation dependent.
4    An SVC 99 is issued to allocate the archive dataset.
5    Generate ACB for archive dataset access.
6    Open archive dataset and internal reader.
7    Generate RPL for archive dataset access.
8    Check whether in initialisation, termination, or switch processing.
9    If in initialisation processing, the journal is being closed to ensure an
EOF is written to the dataset and reason code TEU is set in the archive control
record.  If no record is found for a current journal, a clean archive control
dataset is being used and the routine is exited.  If the record is found, a
status flag in the archive record is set to indicate that an archiving procedure
has been submitted.  This situation can only arise in an emergency restart.
10   If in termination processing, the archive dataset is read sequentially
forward until a record for the current journal is found.  This record is updated
with a TTU in the indicator byte and an TSU in the status flag.
11   If in switch processing, the archive dataset is read sequentially forward
until a record for the current journal is found.  This record is updated with an
TSU in the indicator byte and an TSU in the status flag.
     The indicator set in steps 9, 10, and 11 enables viewing of how journalling
in the CICS region has performed via a TSO CLIST.
12   After successful editing, the archive record is re-written with the data
and time of switching, termination, or initialisation.  Also two records are
submitted to the internal reader to submit the archiving procedure as a started
task.
13   The archive dataset is closed and de-allocated via an SVC 99.
14   DFHPC TYPE=RETURN macro is issued.
RECORD LAYOUT FOR ARCHIVE CONTROL DATASET
VSAMWORK  DS   0CL50
VSAMDAT1  DS   CL5  9s complemented Julian date initialisation
VSAMTIM1  DS   CL6  9s complemented time initialisation
VSAMJRNL  DS   CL8  Journal name
VSAMRSN   DS   CL1  Reason Code (I,E,S or T)
VSAMDAT2  DS   CL5  Julian date of archiving submission
VSAMTIM2  DS   CL6  Time of archiving submission
VSAMSTAT  DS   CL1  Status flag (blank, S or A)
VSAMJRNL reason code values
%    I = Initialisation processing
%    E = Emergency restart
%    S = Switch processing
%    T = Termination processing.
VSAMSTAT status flag values
%    Blank = Initial value assigned on open
 %    S = Submitted archive job
%    A = Archived current journal.

Jean Marie Lyon and Laurence Hart
General Foods Corporation (USA)    ) General Foods 1988





























































