 Recording character data with THE MONITOR
ICI has a number of computer centres running CICS and those which make most use
of it all use THE MONITOR from Landmark Systems Inc as an aid to tuning and
debugging.  We also record accounting and performance data using CMF for passing
to MorinoUs MICS accounting package.  We are keen to avoid the high overhead
resulting from the operation of CMF by recording accounting information on the
file written by THE MONITOR and switching off CMF.
The data required to allocate charges is held in two 8-byte fields:  a user log-
on-id and a field holding a project code and an account code.  The present
version of THE MONITOR provides only one character field solely for recording
user data and this has only 8 bytes.  It is possible to store small amounts of
data in fields that THE MONITOR uses to record CICS fields, such as transaction-
id, program name and operator-id but several of our computer centres had already
started to use the user data field and some of the other character fields.
Since my aim was to install a standard company-wide system without conflicting
with established users of fields in THE MONITOR record, I had to find an
additional area to store my accounting data.
I noted that THE MONITOR record is of variable length and hoped that I would be
able to use a program running at THE MONITOR exit point to increase the record
length and append my character data to the data recorded by THE MONITOR.  I
consulted Landmark Systems who sent me a small change to the program which
allocates the record area when the CICS task starts.  This enabled my exit
program to add the accounting data to the end of THE MONITOR record without
overwriting another taskUs data.  THE MONITOR programs that access the file with
my extra data on it, obviously do not access it but they do pass it through for
collection by MICS.
The accounting data is recorded by the ICI sign-on program in the TCTTE user
area from where THE MONITOR exit program collects it (the exit program cannot
issue CICS commands but has access to the TCA).
In addition to the 16 bytes of accounting data, I also record the 8-byte network
name of the terminal so that its identity is preserved when our auto-install
program allocates CICS terminal-ids that cannot be matched with an actual
terminal because they are allocated off a stack as the terminalUs sign-on.
Until a later release of THE MONITOR allows a larger area of character data for
users to fill, this technique provides an easy way of extending the usefulness
of THE MONITOR and reducing consumption of CPU cycles in CICS.

Kevin Dean
Systems Programmer
ICI European Technical Support (UK)     ) ICI PLC 1988


























