 A potential problem with RDO
We have just completed a migration from DOS to MVS/XA and in the process we
upgraded from BTAM to VTAM and from CICS 1.5 to 1.6.1.  We use RDO for PPT and
PCT definitions and run four test CICS regions and four production CICS regions
with MRO.  We have been running this configuration for about a year now with no
major problems.
As I said before we are using RDO and we have organised our own lists copying
IBM group entries thus giving us more flexibility but at the expense of losing
the IBM protection that comes with IBMUs DFHLIST.  What happened is just human
error, it follows MurphyUs law exactly, and is acceptable.  What is unacceptable
is that IBM gives no warning.
A couple of weeks ago one of our junior systems programmers went on holiday.
The first week passed without incident and then one morning we lost
communication from VTAM to one of the production CICS regions, although we still
had communications via MRO from the Terminal Owning Region (TOR).  As the
majority of users were communicating from the TOR there was no need to panic,
although I was concerned because I thought we might also lose our TOR.  The
other CICS regions remained unaffected.  The next day we did lose our CICS TOR
and production was down for the day.
What had occurred was that the systems programmer mentioned previously had done
some maintenance on the RDO file and had inadvertently deleted the group DFHVTAM
from the lists of three of the production CICS regions.  We have START=AUTO
coded in our SIT so we had no problems until the first morning we did a COLD
start.
The symptoms of this error are the following:
1    No IBM message anywhere indicating anything is wrong.
2    CICS comes up normally and when you try to log-on to it, your terminal goes
into a system wait.
3    When CICS is shut down normally with TCEMT PERFORM SHUTU everything is
normal except the last message you get is DFH2305I TERMINATION OF VTAM SESSIONS
BEGINNING and CICS sits with an event wait.  In order to shut down the CICS
region you must issue TCEMT PERFORM SHUT IMMU.
Needless to say this error could have been corrected in five minutes if we had
known what was causing it, but being new users of VTAM and MVS, and old users of
CICS, we suspected everything but CICS.  We had also done an IPL the previous
day so that didnUt help.  We opened a problem with IBM, priority number 1,
thinking VTAM was at fault and possibly CICS, but with no results.  Finally with
cool heads and the day nearly over, through the process of elimination, we
discovered the missing group entry.
I feel this type of oversight should never cause this kind of delay and IBM
should correct it by issuing a message when CICS is coming up, telling the user
of any critical components that are missing from the RDO file.  To this effect I
have had the IBM assistance centre submit a PASR.  Although the PASR has been
confirmed as submitted, as yet I have had no further response.  When talking to
the IBM problem support representative it was indicated that this could happen
to 1.7 users as well.
Before we had RDO this type of error was difficult to make but as we all know
you can easily fall asleep at the keyboard and delete a group.  I checked
through all the back issues of CICS Update that I have, hoping to find some
mention of a similar incident, but I found none.  That is why I decided to write
this article and in so doing I hope I can save some other poor soul from losing
a dayUs production.

Wayne R Bluett
Technical Support Analyst
Assurance-vie Desjardins (Canada)  ) Xephon 1988










