 Control Interval Size for VSAM datasets
Occasionally, application programmers experience CICS access problems with newly
defined VSAM datasets.  One of the reasons for this is the Control Interval Size
(CISZ) for that dataset.  If there is no CISZ given when a cluster is defined,
IDCAMS will calculate the value.  This calculated CISZ for the index level is
generally acceptable.  However, depending on a number of factors, the resulting
data level Control Interval Size may exceed the largest buffer size which CICS
has available to handle the I/O request.  The following explanation about how
VSAM buffers are sometimes handled under CICS should clarify the reason why
access problems might occur.
LOCAL SHARED RESOURCES
CICS installations often take advantage of the VSAM facility called Local Shared
Resources (LSR) to reduce the total amount of buffer space required by CICS.
When LSR is used, if a buffer space parameter has been specified for the VSAM
dataset (eg when the cluster was defined), it is ignored.  In place of dedicated
buffer space for each individual dataset, there is a set of buffer subpools that
will be shared between VSAM datasets.
For VSAM files accessed under CICS (using LSR) the I/O is serviced through
buffers that have been defined in the CICS FCT.  The attributes of the LSR pool
such as the number of buffers and the buffer size for each subpool can be
explicitly declared (instead of letting CICS calculate the values) with the CICS
resource definition macro DFHFCT TYPE=SHRCTL.  A simple example might be fifteen
512-byte and ten 2048-byte buffers in one subpool.  The link to the actual usage
of this shared buffer pool is made with the specification for LSRPOOL for the
macro DFHFCT TYPE=DATASET.
When LSRPOOL has been specified in the FCT, it is necessary for application
programmers to know the largest buffer size that has been defined and to ensure
that the CISZ does not exceed this value.  Otherwise, the I/O cannot be
serviced.
For applications requiring maximum throughput, it might be desirable to have
dedicated VSAM buffers.
CONCLUSION
When defining a VSAM dataset to be accessed under CICS, the CISZ should be
specified at the data level (not at the cluster level).  Let IDCAMS choose the
index CISZ.  A small CISZ is preferrable for datasets being processed for update
because there is an enqueue for an entire Control Interval when it is accessed
for update.  The larger the CISZ, the more records will be locked out from other
CICS users.

Harold Dunlap
Intermediate Technical Analyst
HudsonUs Bay Company (Canada) ) Harold Dunlap 1988
























