 Recent IBM announcements
While CICS itself may not have been the main focal point of IBMUs mainframe
software announcements on 19 April, there are several new functions and features
which should help reinforce confidence in the future value of currently-
developed CICS applications across a fair cross-section of environments.  Those
that stand to benefit most from the announcements will be those that embark on
the migration to MVS/ESA, CICS/DB2 users, and VSE sites; although the general
tone of the announcements accentuated the strategic importance of CICS generally
and should reassure all users of IBMUs commitment to CICSUs future growth.
CICS UNDER MVS/ESA
When IBM announced Enterprise System Architcture (ESA) and MVS/ESA in February
1988, it was left unclear how the newly-introduced concept of Hiperspace could
and would be used.  IBM has now provided a better picture of how this can be
achieved and has unveiled the first examples of Hiperspace exploitation, notably
for CICS systems by offering them the ability to have native VSAM buffers and
DL/I VSAM buffers in Hiperspace.
The implementation will be restricted to Hiperspaces in Expanded Storage only
and will be initially achieved through Small Programming Enhancements (SPEs) to
CICS/MVS 2.1 and IMS/VS 2.2, and the installation of MVS/SP 3.1 (MVS/ESA) and
MVS/DFP 3.1.  Buffer pools in Hiperspaces will not support OSAM buffers nor VSAM
buffer pools which are not exact multiples of 4K.  Once installed, the facility
will be transparent to the user.
IBM has taken this opportunity to reiterate its support for VIO temporary
datasets in Expanded Storage.  This was originally delivered through an SPE to
MVS/SP 2.2 and will now be incorporated in MVS/ESA.  The concept of using VIO
datasets to hold CICS libraries, which was propounded by Kari Myllniemi in an
article Speeding up program loads (CICS Update September 1986, issue 10), has
even greater implications in the light of this announcement.
CICS AND DB2
Many users and industry analysts have publicly expressed concern about the
ability of DB2 to sustain very high transaction rates and, to a lesser extent,
the manner in which CICS and DB2 interact.  These doubts should be dispelled
with Version 2 of DB2.  Although IBM has not quoted figures on DB2 Version 2
performance with CICS, gains of up to 50% compared to Version 1 have been cited
for IMS/DC and TSO/E .  If these performance gains are realised in real CICS
production environments, DB2 will become the database management system at an
increasing number of installations, although CICS probably remains less
effective as a vehicle for delivering interactive capabilities than TSO/E or
IMS/DC.
A CICS Attach exit will be provided to enable CICS/DB2 applications to select
the plans they need dynamically, giving users the ability to group DB2 plans by
logical function.
CICS AND VSE
The main change in VSE/SP 3.2 that will directly affect CICS users will be the
increase in the allowable number of address spaces from 3 to 9 and the raising
of the upper virtual storage threshold from 40Mb to 128Mb.  With so much virtual
storage now available to VSE installations, a considerable deceleration in the
rate of migrations from VSE to MVS can be expected, particularly migrations that
were traditionally fuelled by CICS sites outgrowing their VSE environments.
IBMUs decision to place the VSE version of CICS under the SAA umbrella may owe
more to marketing strategy than any increased functionality.  It will certainly
be seen as such by IBMUs more cynical observers.  Nevertheless, it assures users
of the continued affinity between the DOS and OS versions of CICS, which has
always been enjoyed in the past.
AVAILABILITY
CICS/MVS 2.1 was originally scheduled to be available without XRF by the fourth
quarter 1987 in North America and by the first quarter 1988 in Europe.  IBM has
since announced that availability would be delayed.  No revised date has yet
been announced although a new date is expected to be announced very shortly.
The following is a list of the general availability dates for Europe for the
versions of the other products mentioned above.  Dates for North America will be
up to three months earlier in most cases.
%    MVS/SP 3.1.0   -    3rd quarter 1988
%    MVS/DFP 3.1.0  -    3rd quarter 1988
%    IMS/VS 2.2          -    3rd quarter 1988
%    DB2 Version 2  -    November 1988
 %    VSE/SP 3.2          -    December 1988.

     ) Xephon 1988































































