 CICS Statement of Direction
The following Statement of Direction for CICS is reproduced in its entirety with
the permission of IBM.  It presents a clear indication of IBMUs commitment to
CICS in the 1990s and does much to allay any uncertainties customers may have
about its continued growth.  Users with a heavy investment in CICS macro-level
programs appear to be the hardest hit although we would expect a range of
migration tools to become available from both IBM and third-party software
vendors.  It should be stressed that the following statement of direction is
more a blueprint for the staged evolution of CICS than a wholesale description
of a new release.
For customer planning purposes, IBM has announced a new CICS direction.  IBM
intends to provide a new code base, which operates only in an MVS/ESA*
environment, and which excludes some old function, particularly support for
macro-level applications and support for devices and controllers accessed using
BTAM.
HIGHLIGHTS
%    New code base for CICS on MVS/ESA*.
%    31-bit implementation for more CICS code and control blocks.
%    Upwards compatibility for CICS command-level applications.
%    Some old function discontinued.
%    Co-existence support for discontinued function via intercommunication to
CICS/MVS Version 2.
%    Systems Application Architecture (SAA) environment support.
DESCRIPTION
For customer planning purposes, IBM has announced a new CICS direction for the
MVS/ESA* environment.  IBM intends to provide a new CICS code base, giving
improved integrity and serviceability, and providing a foundation for future
enhancements.  Provision for customer growth will stem from CICS code and
control blocks residing above the 16Mb line, and by operating only in an
MVS/ESA* environment, including use of the Library Lookaside function of MVS/SP*
Version 3.  The new CICS will provide upwards compatibility for command-level
applications and will continue to evolve as a major SAA environment.
To enable this new direction, the new CICS will include rearranged control
blocks and will discontinue support for certain old functions, including among
others:
1    Execution of CICS macro-level applications.
2    Devices and controllers accessed using BTAM.
3    Direct addressing of CICS control block fields (other than the EIB and user
areas), except by CICS exits and CICS User Replaceable Modules.
4    CICS internal security.  Instead, the new CICS will make use of RACF (or an
equivalent security package) for security and for CICS operator data.
IBM recognises that some customers will want to keep in production certain
applications which use the discontinued functions.  Such applications can remain
on CICS/MVS Version 2, co-existing with the new CICS through the use of CICS
intercommunication facilities.  For example, ongoing support for BTAM will be
provided by a CICS/MVS Version 2 Terminal Owning Region transaction routing to
the new CICS.  Similarly, macro-level-based applications may continue to run in
a CICS/MVS Version 2 system sharing data with the new CICS.
As well as being the long-term base for co-existence, CICS/MVS Version 2 will
provide customers with advantages over CICS/OS/VS Version 1, including early use
of ESA function and additional constraint relief.  CICS/OS/VS Version 1 will be
stabilised.
MVS/ESA and MVS/SP are trademarks of the International Business Machines
Corporation.

          ) International Business Machines Corporation 1988










