CICS file placement

INTRODUCTION

A constant dilemma facing CICS performance analysts is whether
maximum performance can be achieved by putting all CICS files
(DL/I and VSAM) on one disk string or whether it is better to
spread them over different strings and channels.
Those in favour of using a single string (provided there is
sufficient disc space of course) argue that as CICS is a single
address space it is more or less serialising its I/Os.  But is the
emphasis on 'more' or 'less'?  They also argue that the CICS I/Os
are not obstructed by the I/Os from other subsystems.
With the introduction of an IBM 3090-180S with an additional
disc string, we did the following study in order to decide what to
do with all our CICS files.


HARDWARE ENVIRONMENT

Figure 1 shows our DASD configuration.  We have four disk strings
each with a 3880 controller which is connected to the CPU with
two channels operating in balanced mode.
One string still has 'old technology' A models.  The other strings
have D and E models and also the Device Level Selection (DLS)
capability.


SOFTWARE ENVIRONMENT

The main software running at our installation is:

%   MVS/XA 2.2.0

%   CICS 1.6.1

%   IMS/DB 1.3

%   THE MONITOR FOR CICS Release 7.1

%   CAPTURE/MVS Release 4.52

%   BEST1/MVS Release 11.0 (to perform the simulations).



GENERAL METHODOLOGY

%   An analytic model was built based on RMF/SMF figures for
    the periods 9.00 to 12.00 and 13.00 to 16.00.

%   The individual placement of files on different packs was not
    considered.  In all the simulations, we only moved disk packs
    around.  We never moved files from one pack to another.  This
    kept the number of I/Os per second on each pack constant.

%   None of the channels, disk controllers, or disks were
    overloaded.

%   We did not move any page packs onto 3380E models.  In our
    case, migrating two 3380D packs to one 3380E pack would lead to
    a device busy over 50%, which we would consider unacceptable.

%   For each workload we analysed the total response time per
    transaction and the total response time attributable to I/O.

%   Our most critical workloads in terms of required
    performance are (in descending order): production CICS, batch
    DL/I sharing, TSO period 1, batch, test CICS, and TSO period 2.


WORKLOADS

With CAPTURE/MVS, an analytic model was built of our actual
environment.  The following eight different workloads were
identified:

1   ACIC-F.  A special kind of production CICS with very few
    terminal transactions but a high volume of batch DL/I sharing jobs
    which access a few databases of that CICS via MRO/IRC
    communication.  The response time per transaction is high.
2   ACIC-O.  Two test CICS systems.
3   ACIC-P.  Production CICS.
4   BATCH.  Normal production and test batch.
5   DL/I-BA.  Batch-DL/I sharing jobs accessing production CICS
    files via MRO/IRC communication.
6   TSOT1.  TSO period 1.
7   TSOT2.  TSO periods 2, 3, 4, and 5.
8   XOTHER.  All other workloads (started tasks, VTAM, JES etc).

Because of the mixture of the different kinds of work in this
workload, the response time figures are rather meaningless and
are only stated for completeness.


FIRST SIMULATION

As production CICS and its files were our main concern, we spread
the CICS packs over the four available disk strings in order to
spread the total number of I/Os on those disks equally over all
channels.  Our most important workloads have better response
times but we need to keep in mind that, by moving some CICS
packs to other strings, the model changed from 3380 to 3380D.
This in itself leads to better performance.


SECOND SIMULATION

We re-arranged the configuration resulting from our first
simulation in order to spread equally over all the channels, not
only the I/Os on the CICS packs, but also the I/Os to all the other
packs.  Compared with our first simulation we have better
performance for batch but worse performance for our production
CICS.


THIRD SIMULATION

As mentioned earlier, in our previous simulations we experienced
not only the effect of putting disks on other strings but also the
effect of modifying CICS 3380 packs to 3380D packs.  In this
simulation, we started from our base model and exchanged CICS
3380 packs with the less-used 3380D models in our configuration.
The results are more or less on a par with the previous cases,
certainly as far as the performance of production CICS.


CONCLUSIONS

Figures 2 and 3 summarise the results of all these simulations
while the corresponding device utilisation is shown in Figures 4, 5,
6, and 7.

The exercise has led us to the following conclusions:

%   The 3380D disc packs should be used for our CICS files
    (databases, VSAM datasets, LOADLIBs, log files etc).

%   Placing CICS packs on different strings does not have a great
    influence on CICS response times as long as path utilisation does
    not exceed 20 to 25%.

%   Reserving a complete disk string for CICS packs only does
    not in itself guarantee the best performance.


Fran ois Mortier
Systems Support Manager
Atlas Copco Airpower NV (Belgium) ) Xephon 1989

