A preliminary look at CICS OS/2 Version 1.20

If you're reading CICS Update, you probably work with CICS
on a mainframe and you might not have thought much about
the possibility of running CICS on an OS/2 platform.  But even
if you don't have an OS/2 machine, you might want to know
what CICS OS/2 1.20 is and what it does. You don't have to be
an OS/2 expert to understand this article or use the product.

CICS OS/2 Version 1.20 became available in February 1990.
The IBM CICS Technical Conference held on December 12-
15, 1989, in Miami featured three conference sessions and a
live demonstration covering the new version.

I originally had the impression that CICS OS/2 was just a
program development tool which allowed a programmer to
write and syntax-check command-level programs to be run on a
mainframe. In fact, it is a real version of CICS that can be used
for both test and production purposes. The previous version,
CICS OS/2 1.10, was introduced early in 1988. It supported a
level of functionality comparable with mainframe CICS 1.5.
Version 1.20 will support a level of functionality somewhere
between mainframe CICS 1.7 and CICS 2.1.

APPEARANCE OF CICS UNDER OS/2

CICS OS/2 1.20 is sufficiently compatible with mainframe
CICS that it doesn't have its own application programmer's
reference manual.  You just use the mainframe CICS
command-level Application Programmer's Reference (SC33-
0512), because the EXEC CICS application program interface
is virtually identical.  You can download a copy of your
existing mainframe command-level programs, recompile them,
set up test files and databases, and run them on the OS/2
machine.  The transaction's displays will look much as they do
on a mainframe 3270 under BMS, except the CICS displays
will be in a window.

The CICS OS/2 1.20 environment is a program that runs under
OS/2 Extended Edition using Presentation Manager.  The
internal architecture of CICS OS/2 bears no resemblance to any
version of mainframe CICS, because the hardware platform
and operating system are entirely different.

CICS is started from the OS/2 'start programs' pick list or from
the OS/2 command prompt. Once CICS is running, you can set
up your tables with RDO, just as you would on mainframe
CICS.  All of the CICS system definition information is kept in
one file on your OS/2 machine's hard disk. If you define
several logical terminals, CICS OS/2 will give each of them a
separate OS/2 PM window.  You can switch between them.
This is like having two or more CICS terminals on your desk,
and you don't need to know OS/2 Presentation Manager to set it
up. CICS OS/2 1.20 comes with the normal diagnostic tools
such as CEDF, CECI, CEBR, dump, and trace table.  Its help
functions take the place of a messages and codes manual.

You might have heard people say that OS/2 is a multi-tasking
system but not a multi-user system.  CICS OS/2 will actually
allow you to connect up to three 3151 ASCII terminals to the
OS/2 machine. They will work like 3270 terminals under BMS
on a mainframe.  Several people can sit at these terminals and
run the CICS transactions they need.  These terminal users will
be able to access CICS from the terminals, but they won't be
able to get to the OS/2 menus or command line prompt. 3151
ASCII terminals are fairly inexpensive but support text only,
not graphics.

You can run CICS OS/2 1.20 without knowing much about
OS/2.  If you can use the file system, that's about all you need.
Mainframe programmers who know CICS, COBOL, VSAM,
and/or SQL can be productive without much retraining.

PRESENTATION MANAGER - ICING ON THE CAKE

It is entirely optional, but OS/2 'heavies' will be able to use
OS/2 Presentation Manager calls in place of CICS BMS
commands and take full advantage of the graphics capabilities
of the OS/2 machine.  CICS OS/2 1.20 will support the C
language. Presentation Manager work can be done in COBOL
or C, but it takes much less overhead in C.  Alternatively, the
CASE/PM product can be used to generate the PM interface. In
either case, you can have a mouse-ready interface to your
datasets which uses windows, buttons, scroll bars, and all of
the other little goodies.  But if you want to port the same CICS
application back to the mainframe, you will have to provide an
alternative front-end program using BMS commands.  This
may change if and when mainframes become equipped for
Presentation Manager graphics.

DATA ACCESS

CICS OS/2 1.20 will access data on the OS/2 machine's hard
disk drive and data on other systems as well. EXEC SQL
command support is available.  CICS OS/2 1.20 supports the
Micro Focus COBOL compiler with its internal SQL support,
as well as IBM's COBOL/2 compiler, which will use the SQL
support in OS/2 Extended Edition 1.2.

CICS OS/2 contains its own VSAM file access method. The
command-level interface is identical to the mainframe
implementation.  Files are set up with RDO.  You can test your
CICS VSAM applications on the OS/2 machine and migrate
them to the mainframe later.  This VSAM file support is part of
CICS OS/2 not the COBOL compiler. OS/2 COBOL programs
can get at the local VSAM files only through CICS commands.
Suppose you want to do a batch print program which needs the
OS/2 VSAM files.  Since the print program won't need to
interact with the user, you want it to run while you are doing
something else. It's easy to write a CICS OS/2 program that
reads the desired data from the VSAM files and sends it to the
OS/2 spooled printer which is available to CICS OS/2.  You
can launch all your CICS print tasks from a little selection
menu and then go back to doing something more worthwhile
than watching the printer.

Now for communications support - CICS OS/2 1.20 supports
LU2 (3270-type) or LU6.2 (APPC), at the EXEC CICS level.
Connecting an OS/2 machine with a mainframe or with another
OS/2 machine under VTAM is much like connecting two
mainframes.  ASCII/EBCDIC translation routines are provided.
You can use function shipping, transaction routing,
asynchronous processing, and APPC.  You can reach
mainframe DL/I databases on remote CICS or IMS/DC
systems.  You'll be able to link with other systems using
CRTE.  You can connect with other CICS OS/2 machines
through LU6.2 or NetBios.  You can even execute a program
on the mainframe by EXEC CICS LINK from the OS/2
machine, if you set up your security to permit this.  This
capability is called Distributed Program Link (DPL), which
mainframe CICS does not yet have.

REQUIREMENTS

One CICS OS/2 licence is required for each OS/2 CICS
machine.  There is no charge for adding terminals.  CICS OS/2
1.2 needs OS/2 Extended Edition 1.1 or 1.2 (preferably the
latter) on an 80386 machine or better. CICS needs at least 1.3
megabytes of usable memory beyond that required by OS/2;
more for extra terminals.  While in theory you can install CICS
OS/2 in text mode under DOS 3.3 or 4.0, you won't have
enough memory available to do anything worthwhile.

You'll also need a compiler. CICS OS/2 1.20 supports Micro
Focus COBOL (with the Workbench debugging tools if
desired), the IBM COBOL/2 compiler, or the IBM C/2
compiler.  Some IBMers say that the Microsoft C and COBOL
compilers will also work.  The Micro Focus COBOL compiler
comes with its own SQL support.  If you want to use SQL with
the IBM COBOL/2 compiler, you'll have to wait for OS/2 EE
1.2, which is due out this spring.

CICS OS/2 1.20 is distributed only on a mainframe tape, not
on diskettes.  It has to be downloaded to the PS/2 using a
communications link.  If you are interested in developing CICS
software but you are not in a mainframe shop, IBM will still
sell you the tape, but you will have to obtain communications
hardware and find a mainframe service bureau that will
download it to your OS/2 machine.This policy may change in
the future.

ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES

Let's start with the disadvantages of running CICS under OS/2.
Obviously, it costs more to get an OS/2 machine than to plug
another dumb terminal into your mainframe.  So, if you have a
mainframe with plenty of excess capacity, you might not be
able to justify another processor.  Also, there are still a few
features not supported by CICS OS/2 1.2.  It doesn't build DL/I
databases directly on your microcomputer hard disk drive,
although it can access DL/I databases on a mainframe.  It uses
minimum-function BMS, which means it handles neither BMS
built-in paging nor unusual terminal devices such as bank teller
machines.  It doesn't yet handle a two-phase commit under
APPC.  A very few other EXEC CICS commands aren't
implemented.

Now for the advantages.  If CICS OS/2 is used as a
development machine, then programmers don't have to wait for
CICS compilations and listings, for test CICS to be brought up,
for VTAM communication links to be restored, or for changes
to be made to test CICS.  Applications programmers can take
responsibility for maintaining the CICS RDO and program
libraries on their own test machines. CICS OS/2 1.20 has the
usual testing tools available with mainframe CICS, plus some
extras, such as the Micro Focus animated debug.  It even has a
feature which mainframe users have been demanding for years
without getting - task protected storage. CICS OS/2 will
display an error message if any application tries to tamper with
storage which doesn't belong to it.   If the programmer crashes
or locks up the OS/2 machine, he or she can reboot the OS/2
machine without affecting other people's testing.  This means
fewer calls to the help desk or to systems programming.

If CICS OS/2 is used for production, you have some flexibility
in distributed application design.  You can set it up so that
users can enter data even when the link to the mainframe is
down.  Confidential data which is not meant to be shared with
the mainframe can be isolated on an OS/2 machine.  Other
systems cannot get at the data if you don't set up links for them
to do so.  Complex user interface processing can be done
without using mainframe resources.

The following manuals are or will be available:

%     CICS OS/2 Version 1.20 General Information GC33-0637-1

%     CICS OS/2 System Applications Design Guide SC33-0616

%     CICS OS/2 License Information SC33-0598.

Alida M Jatich
Cogito Corporation (USA)                         ) Cogito Corporation 1990


