Multiple MPS systems under VSE

One of the more important restrictions of DL/I is that only a
single MPS system is allowed per operating system.  Our shop
uses both production and test CICS regions, with batch
programs being run against both sets of DL/I files during the
working day.  When the production CICS was generated for
MPS, the programming staff were left without that feature,
resulting in an awkward procedure whereby those testing on-
line applications would wait while the batch programmers
closed the DL/I files and did their testing.  When they were
finished the files were re-opened and the batch programmers
would now wait their turn while the on-line group tested.

Experimentation revealed a simple reason for the single-MPS
restriction.  If both the production and test CICS systems were
generated for MPS and brought up together, they would both
attempt to post XECBs with the same names.  Whichever
system managed to post an XECB first would prevent the other
from posting an XECB of the same name, causing MPS to fail
in the second system.

The next step was to try to make the production and test
systems post XECBs with different names.  Surprisingly, this
simple modification was the only thing needed to run multiple
MPS systems under the same operating system.

The source code for the following DL/I modules is needed:
DLZBPC00, DLZISC00, DLZMPC00, DLZMPI00,
DLZMPUR0, and DLZMSTP0.  For VSE/SP systems, these
will be found in the PRD2.DBASE library set.

The XECB names in these programs are all of the form
DLZXCBnn, where nn is 01, 02, N1, N2, etc.  Simply copy
the source code to another library and change the XECB names
to something else (eg DTZXCBnn).  Be warned - some of the
program labels are the same as the XECB names!  It will be
easier to locate every XECBTAB macro in each program and
change the XECB name manually than to try doing a 'scan and
replace' with a source statement librarian/editor.  Also note that
DLZMPI00 contains the literal 'DLZXCB11' towards the very
end of the program.  This is a default XECB name and must be
changed to conform with the others (DTZXCB11 or whatever).

Assemble the six modified programs and catalogue them to the
test load library (the one used by the test CICS system).  Leave
the original IBM-supplied modules for the production system.
Generate both CICS systems for MPS support and bring them
up.

We have been running two MPS systems in this manner for
over three years with no problems.  Our environment is
VSE/SP 2.1.4, CICS 1.6, and DL/I 1.7.

Christopher Knight
DBA
TSS - Seedman's Inc (USA)                  ) Christopher Knight 1990


