IBM announcements

The announcements of 5 September contained something that
will interest all sections of the IBM mainframe user base.  In
particular, CICS/ESA 3.2 was announced together with a new
version of CICS for users of the newly-announced VSE/ESA
operating system.  IBM was at great pains to emphasize the
extent to which both these newcomers to the CICS family
would comply with SAA standards - a marked contrast to the
position it originally adopted with respect to CICS and SAA.


CICS/ESA 3.2

Principally, CICS/ESA 3.2 extends the capacity of CICS/ESA
3.1 and boosts performance.  Most of the CICS nucleus
modules are shifted above the 16-megabyte line where they are
joined by the major CICS tables, notably the TCT.  This will
free up 400K of storage below the line for the nucleus modules
plus around 600 bytes per terminal.  Additional performance
benefits can be expected through speedier initial MRO
connection times, improved program retrieval, and a reduction
in the amount of monitoring overhead.

As IBM has already indicated, macro-level support is totally
withdrawn in CICS/ESA 3.2.  IBM recommends users to run
any macro-level applications, which are not going to be
converted, on a CICS/MVS 2.1.1 system.  The EXEC CICS
ADDRESS CSA command will no longer be permitted -
system information should be accessed through the INQUIRE
and SET commands.

The SAA Common Programming Interface for communications
is now offered to CICS users as an alternative to the command-
level interface for LU6.2 services and program-to-program
communication.  In addition, the developers of SAA Common
User Access applications will find improved cursor support on
input mapping.

Other 'goodies' in CICS/ESA 3.2 include a batch interface to
the CSD file, some command-level equivalents of functions
only previously available through macro-level CICS, improved
LU6.2 security, the ability to remove dynamically-installed
resource definitions from a running CICS system, enhanced
CICS message handling facilities, and the simplified start-up of
resource managers such as DBCTL.

CICS/ESA 3.2 will be generally available from July 1991.
Third-party software vendors are invited to take part in an early
test program offered by the IBM Software Vendor System
Support Center in Dallas.


CICS/VSE 2.1

Essentially CICS/VSE 2.1 brings XRF to VSE/ESA.  It will
automatically detect any failures occurring in a CICS system
and switch the workload to an alternative CICS system thus
minimizing the disruption and eliminating operator
intervention.

The product incorporates a facility for identifying the first
occurrence of a problem and capturing the data required for its
resolution.  The diagnosis of the problem is performed through
a new off-line component.

CICS/VSE 2.1 boasts a number of connectivity improvements.
A user-replaceable program allows CICS to select transaction
routing destinations dynamically in MRO or ISC environments.
There is also support for transaction routing for LU6.2 devices
and systems using APPC, and support for communicating with
CICS OS/2 systems.

CICS/VSE 2.1 supports applications written using VS COBOL
II but users will have to wait for a future release before they get
the capability of storing and executing these applications in
storage above the 16-megabyte line.  C language support is
also promised for a future release.

IBM does not say explicitly anywhere that this will be the last
CICS release with full macro-level support but it will be
shipping the DFHMSCAN utility, which identifies macro-level
code, with CICS/VSE 2.1.

CICS/VSE 2.1 will be generally available from December
1990.





