Expanding the DL/I storage pools - an update

The November 1988 Issue of CICS Update included my article,
Expanding the CICS/DL/I storage pools, which contained a
program I wrote to allow the CICS DL/I control block (ie PSB,
DMB, and ENQ) pools to be expanded beyond the CICS-
supplied limit of 999K.  I would like to make you aware that
IBM has made changes to CICS in that area, and if you used
the supplied program to enlarge the DL/I pools you will be
interested in those changes.

The following APARs were recently released for CICS/OS and
CICS/MVS to address the issue of DL/I control block pool
limits in CICS:

o     PL55667 - CICS/OS
o     PL51516 - CICS/MVS.

The limit of the pools had been 999K; these APARs contained
changes that will allow the DMB and PSB pools to be up to
9999K, a ten-fold increase. My article supplied, as one option,
a USERMOD to DFHSIT to do this same thing; with the above
APARs you can now back off this USERMOD if you used it.
As an alternative, a program was also supplied with the article
which, if used, effectively raised the limits from 999K to
3996K, by changing the size factor in the SIT keywords from
1K to 4K.  For example, if you specified PSBPL=500 in the
SIT, the DLPLPGM PLTPI program would raise the pool limit
from 500K to 2000K.  With the above APAR applied you can
now directly specify PSBPL=2000 - the program is no longer
needed.  The same is true with the DMBPL SIT parameter.

Another possibility is that some readers, although unhappy
with the 999K limit, chose not to use my program because of
an understandable reluctance to do unnatural things in CICS.
These will doubtless be pleased that they now have an IBM-
supplied way to address this former restriction.

Finally, I would note that the ENQPL SIT limit is still 999K.
If you used my program to expand this pool you could continue
to do so, even with IMS/ESA and/or CICS/ESA with local
DL/I.  However, it is unlikely that many installations would
need an ENQ pool this large.  In addition, this program will
serve no purpose in a CICS/ESA DBCTL environment.  I
would recommend that you investigate to see if you can take
advantage of these increased limits.


Christopher Frank
Lead Systems Programmer
AMEV Data Center (USA)


