CICS PD/MVS


INTRODUCTION

"CICS Problem Determination/MVS (CICS PD/MVS) is a new
product which provides a set of on-line tools for use by systems
support personnel during the diagnosis and resolution of CICS
region failures in the CICS/ESA Version 3.1.1 environment.
Facilities include symptom and dump analysis, problem
tracking, memory displays, and comprehensive help
information." (IBM Announcement Letter, 27 July 1990.)  In
short, CICS PD/MVS reads dumps for you, but there is a lot
more to it than that.


USERS' QUESTIONS

"What about transaction failures?"  "What about CICS Version
2 (CICS/MVS)?"  Both questions were asked by callers in the
question and answer session of an IBM Field Television
Network (FTN) broadcast on 31 October 1990.  Bob Hartley of
the CICS Hursley development laboratories responded to both.
"Transaction dumps are not currently supported, but we know
they will have to be in the future", he said, and went on to say
that "The requirement to support CICS/MVS is well
understood, but at this time we are not sure if CICS PD/MVS
will ever support Version 2."


PRE-REQUISITES

Release 1 became available near the end of 1990.  Pre-requisite
software and minimum Version/Release requirements include:
ISPF Version 2.3, MVS/ESA 3.1.3, CICS/ESA 3.1.1, VTAM
Version 3, and TSO/E 1.4.  Installation is through SMP/E with
customization done using an ISPF panel.  IPCS must also be
functional as CICS PD/MVS uses it.


DEVELOPMENT OF CICS PD/MVS

Although not discussed in the announcement letter,
Compuware was a major player in the development of CICS
PD/MVS.  Compuware is privately held, stock not being traded
on the stock market.  Datamation (1 December 1990,
Software's Big 50) rates Compuware as the 25th largest
software company in the United States with 1,481 employees
and total revenues of $123 million in 1989.  They experienced
a 23 percent growth in revenue over 1988.

In response to another question in that same FTN broadcast,
Hartley acknowledged that CICS PD/MVS is based on
technology from Compuware's RADAR product.
Requirements were determined from customer surveys.  He
stressed that the resultant specifications required major changes
and enhancements.

Perhaps the strongest requirement was that CICS PD/MVS
does not just give you facts, but also makes recommendations
whenever possible.  Also, the user interface appears to have
been built from scratch and runs under ISPF or IPCS.  PF keys
are heavily exploited to reduce keystrokes.  There is even a PF
key menu for each screen:  accessible with a PF key, naturally.


COMPONENTS

The logic of not running CICS PD/MVS as a CICS application
is two-fold.  First, and most obvious, is that you may not have
a CICS system to run it on if you are in the middle of analysing
a CICS system failure.  Secondly, any performance impact
can, theoretically, be totally eliminated if CICS PD/MVS runs
in another address space.

CICS PD/MVS is made up of a number of pieces.  A CICS
dump domain exit is the only piece of CICS PD/MVS that is
actually in the CICS region.  Its sole purpose is to track
changes to CICS.  This requires 4K bytes.

An MVS post-dump exit takes 4K bytes in the DUMPSRV
address space.  If a CICS dump is being created, the exit starts
task ERWCCOPY to determine if this particular CICS region is
one where the customer wanted a dump and any other selection
criteria that might be in place.  If so, ERWCCOPY copies the
dump dataset to the CICS PD/MVS VSAM file used for storing
dumps.  Although it varies, each dump requires about 20
cylinders of DASD.

CPR is a VTAM application that is intended to be left running
at all times.  It periodically checks the VSAM file to see if any
new dumps are ready for analysis.  If so, it will analyse each
dump, creating dump directory entries.  It takes from five to
fifteen minutes to analyse a dump in this manner.

The fifth piece is the interactive user interface that runs in a
TSO address space using IPCS or ISPF.


FEATURES

A problem directory automatically groups similar (or the same)
problems together.  A problem log automatically documents
the problem analysis 'clues' for each problem and provides
room for the comments of the staff working on the problem.  A
change summary lists application and CICS code changes in
reverse chronological order - ie most recent first.

Symptom analysis provides an on-line summary of each
failure, with a list of the most likely reasons for that failure.
Wait analysis tells you why a task is in wait state.

The WHO command helps track down storage violations by
telling you who had access to the memory that was corrupted.
Place the cursor where the corrupted storage begins, hit the
WHO PF key, and a list of all those tasks that had
addressability to the storage will be displayed.

To help you use CICS PD/MVS, a colour monitor is
recommended.  Any highlighted green fields have information
behind them in the form of memory areas: highlighted white
fields do not.  Field sensitive help is also provided, so be sure
that your cursor is properly positioned before hitting the help
key.

To assist in automated operations, an Application Program
Interface (API) is provided.  This set of Assembler macros
could be used to incorporate the knowledge of an installation's
existing CICS problem solvers into a program that calls API
CICS PD/MVS functions to automate the analysis process.

IBM Support Centres (ISCs) throughout the world will be using
CICS PD/MVS to help customers who call them to help resolve
their CICS failures.  When asked by a caller what material
IBM will want to analyse a CICS problem, Surjit Chana, who
demonstrated CICS PD/MVS, said that a machine-readable
copy of the dump dataset will still be appropriate diagnostic
material.  The ISC will then do the conversion to the VSAM
format used by CICS PD/MVS.

How much does it cost?  Monthly licence charges vary from
$1,000 in the US for the largest CPUs to $500 for Processor
Group 28 (4381-14/23/91, ES/9000-150, 3090-100S) and
smaller.  With CICS PD/MVS's ability to import CICS dumps
from other systems, there might be no need for multiple
licences.

To really get a feel for CICS PD/MVS, you have to try it out
for yourself or see it demonstrated by someone who really
knows it.  A video tape of Surjit Chana's demonstration from
the IBM FTN (see above) would give you a start in the right
direction.

Jon E Pearkins
Certified Software Specialists Ltd (Canada)

