CICS capacity planning using SNAP/SHOT

For more than 15 years, IBM has provided a capacity planning
service called SNAP/SHOT for its customers.  An OLTP like
CICS is typically the largest consumer of resources in an
installation, yet response time is critical because of its high
visibility to the end user.  A Field Television Network (FTN)
satellite broadcast on 2 April detailed how SNAP/SHOT can be
applied to CICS capacity planning.

If you are unfamiliar with SNAP/SHOT, you are not alone.
After hearing of it near its inception in the mid-1970s, when it
was used by IBM in a Request For Proposal (RFP) to prove the
adequacy of a 370/125 to meet the batch and CICS work loads
of a local installation, I had not heard it mentioned again until
this FTN.

SNAP/SHOT actually stands for Systems Network Analysis
Program/Simulated Host Overview Technique.  Each week,
twelve IBM customers come to Raleigh, North Carolina, to
spend four to five days on two dedicated 3090s modelling all or
part of their installations under various projected future work
loads using a variety of hardware, software, and/or network
configurations.

SNAP/SHOT is only offered as a service, not a software
offering.  To protect the reputation of SNAP/SHOT for
accuracy, an expert is assigned to each customer, and he or she
spends the entire week making sure it is used correctly.
Secondly, the model is heavily reliant upon the IBM hardware
and software developers to provide detailed measurement
numbers that will describe the exact operation of each IBM
product under all circumstances.  Even more so, in these days
of object code only, IBM would not be willing to risk access to
complete performance numbers by its competitors.


Background

Since its introduction, the Raleigh SNAP/SHOT centre has
provided more than 5,000 sessions.  As well as providing
capacity planning sessions, workshops are provided for data
and voice network design.  Bob Young followed his
SNAP/SHOT overview with a survey of Capacity Planning
methods.  Presented in order of increasing cost and accuracy
they are as follows:

1      Rules of thumb - examples given included:
      -      CICS region size should never exceed 70% utilization
      -      DASD channels should never be more than 30% busy
      -      IMS regions should never be more than 65% occupied.

2      Extrapolation - given monitor reports and a calculator,
      predict growth based on past history.  Neither 1 nor 2
      addresses response time issues.

3      Analytical models - queuing theory is used to create a
      sophisticated mathematical model of CICS.  ANCICS is an
      example of this approach.

4      Discrete simulation - "SNAP/SHOT does not use queuing
      theory;  it actually queues things.  It models the significant
      events in the life of a message, in the case of a network
      study, or in the life of a transaction, in the case of a CPU
      study".  To identify and quantify bottlenecks,
      SNAP/SHOT actually puts things into queues, and later
      removes them.  SNAP/SHOT supports many products.
      ANCICS does a good job modelling CICS, but it only
      models CICS.  SNAP/SHOT models your entire system,
      which is, most often, what is really required.

5      Benchmarking - done properly, a benchmark is an order of
      magnitude more expensive than discrete simulation.  Done
      properly, a benchmark provides a level of accuracy
      impossible to obtain with a discrete simulation.  This is the
      level of accuracy you would want if you were 'betting your
      job' on the results.


Results

What does a capacity plan, particularly one provided by
SNAP/SHOT, provide?  For installations with Service Level
Agreements (SLAs) with their users, a capacity plan will
indicate how long you can meet the commitments in your SLA
with current software, hardware, and communications.  It will
also indicate what will be needed, and when, to continue to
meet those commitments.  A capacity plan can also access the
implications of new applications, growth in existing
applications, and/or data centre relocation.  It can also help
manage the costs of providing good service.

Of special interest to CICS capacity planners is the ability to
measure the effect of new features and new products (eg DB2)
with CICS.  Although a unique capability of SNAP/SHOT, it is
important to realize its limitations.  A capacity plan is an
attempt to predict the future.  SNAP/SHOT can, however, only
measure the effects of products and features that are available
today, since key performance numbers are generally not
accurately known by IBM developers until a product or feature
is released.

During a one-week SNAP/SHOT session, 50 to 200 scenarios
will be tested, with resource utilization and response time
results for each.  Systems programmers will recognize this as
an interesting combination of capacity planning and system
tuning for performance.  Because queues are simulated,
barriers can also be identified.  This can be important
information if the barrier is the result of a parameter setting:  eg
AMAXTASK.

Although it is optional, full modelling of your network is
advised.  As well as providing true end-user response time
numbers, rather than just CICS internal response time, the
identification of future network bottlenecks can be a necessary
tool in meeting future response time goals.  Full network
utilization numbers are also provided for each scenario, with
details for each component:  3745, lines, 3174, etc.

Because response time is one of the two major results of
SNAP/SHOT, a very fine level of detail is available.  Seven
different definitions of response time are supported by
SNAP/SHOT, each succeeding type a subset of the one
preceding it as shown in Figure 1.  As well as providing hard
copy reports with numbers, graphs can be generated using
either a printer or a plotter.


Data Requirements

Carol Streetman then detailed what data and information you
need to obtain before coming to a SNAP/SHOT session.  It
comes predominantly from two sources:

1      Performance monitors and/or SMF to describe the present
      accurately.

2      Management, to estimate the future, in terms of application
      growth projections.

Most installations should record SMF and/or performance
information for a one-hour peak period.  One exception to this
would be sites with a heavy overnight batch work load, who
should record information for both a one hour on-line peak and
a one hour batch peak period.  Another exception would be
sites who are already resource constrained during peak periods.
CICS, for example, when stressed, will get involved in high
overhead activities, like program compression.  Performance
numbers based on such stress conditions cannot be reliably
extrapolated to simulate performance under differing loads.
Instead, data from the hour preceding or following the peak
period would be appropriate.

But, no matter what period is selected, it is crucial that the data
from all sources is for the same day and time.  It is also
important to include all available sources of data.  As a total
system simulator, SNAP/SHOT supports a wide variety of
(IBM) hardware and software, including the AS/400.

For MVS sites, RMF reports or SMF record types 70 to 79 are
required, along with IPS and ICS tables.  These tables are used
to determine dispatch priorities, performance groups, and TSO
MPL and period durations.  Some adjustments may be required
before capturing the performance data.  Performance groups
have to be regenerated if any contain work loads that are
expected to grow at different rates.  All work loads in a
performance group must grow at the same rate.

For VM sites, VMMAP data must be spooled directly to tape
or a VMMAP utility must be used to copy data on DASD to
tape in the correct format.  You will also need to know what
mode (real or virtual) guest operating systems are running in,
whether or not you use handshaking, and whether any guests
are favoured.

VSE sites need VSE/PT reports, plus a list of priorities and
work loads for each partition.

For CICS, records from CMF are required.  Although some
non-IBM monitors can provide records in CMF format, the
SNAP/SHOT staff have yet to see one that provides all the
required information.  Data weights and some region overhead
information, such as task control, is generally missing.

Be sure to collect data for all CICS regions, including test.
Applications being tested today will become production
applications during the life of the capacity plan.  Performance
figures from their test use often provide sufficient information
to predict their behaviour in production.  Of interest for both
production and test CICS applications, is the ability of
SNAP/SHOT to show what the application is actually doing
that may be a significant performance trouble spot:  eg
excessive DL/I calls.

DB2 requires SMF type 100 and 101 or output from the DB2
monitor.  Users of non-IBM DBMSs must supply data that
indicates which CICS transactions access which database and at
what rates.  DB2 users are also required to know how many
threads are being used.

For TSO, RMF reports or SMF records are required.  For
DASD, SMF type 30 interval records are required.  Hit ratios
are also required for caching DASD.  This can be in the form
of output from the Cache Analysis Aid or SMF type 245
records.

Where CICS is the only on-line usage, no other performance
data is required.  If there is significant non-CICS on-line
activity, you will also have to supply VTAM buffer traces,
NCP source code, and node and routing information in the
form of input to RTG or NETDA or path tables.

From user management, determine the expected rates of growth
for each application.  You and/or your management must also
decide how far in the future you want the capacity plan to look
and how often you want to focus.  Capacity plans are generally
one to five years in length and focus on every one to six
months during that period.  One final question:  should growth
be straight-line or compounded?


RESULTS

Data reduction is used to make the results less overwhelming.
One technique is to detail the top 20% of the work load and
lump the rest together.  For CICS, work load is measured in
units of transactions.  This approach assumes the 20/80 rule to
be correct - ie 20% of the transactions drive 80% of the work
load.  Another technique assumes that usage of all transactions
in an application are expected to grow at the same rate.  Lump
all transactions in an application together, except for a few
critical transactions that you monitor carefully for response
time.  These will be detailed separately.

A typical SNAP/SHOT week goes as follows.

Monday

Build models, start calibration (do numbers add up? ie is idle
time plus utilization by all components equal to 100%?).

Tuesday

Finish calibration, start 'what if' analysis (equivalent of tuning
for performance).

Wednesday

Run 'what if' scenarios.

Thursday

Finish scenarios, begin graphing.

Friday (half day)

Finish graphing.


CONCLUSION

As well as a very accurate capacity plan, SNAP/SHOT also
gives you the opportunity to see the effects of software and
hardware you do not presently have, without the administrative
and installation effort required to bring it in-house on trial.

Jon E Pearkins
Certified Software Specialists Ltd (Canada)

