A brief analysis of CICS/ESA 3.3

Those who can remember back to last September's mountain of
IBM product announcements may just recall a couple of lines
buried somewhere in the pile of announcement letters of
particular interest to CICS installations. Notably, there was the
announcement of the Subsystem Storage Protection (SSSP)
feature: a combination of hardware and microcode
implemented on ES/9000 mainframes. While IBM originally
promised to have a version of CICS supporting SSSP ready by
June 1992, it has pulled out all the stops and has it ready now.


CICS/ESA 3.3 STORAGE PROTECTION

Storage violations, or the ability to trample all over someone
else's code or data, has been an inherent flaw in the design of
CICS since its inception and the need to address the problem
has been acknowledged by IBM for some time. IBM's first
stab at solving the problem is confined to preventing CICS
code and data from being overwritten by users: it will still be
possible for the code and data belonging to users to overlay the
storage areas of others. Full storage protection is an objective
IBM will be aiming to achieve in the near future.

The hardware element of SSSP will be a standard part of 9121
processors built or upgraded after June 1992. Other ES/9000
CPUs can have the facility fitted as a priced RPQ or MES:
users should consult their IBM salesman for more detailed
information on upgrades.

Historically, CICS has run in a single MVS region under a
single storage protect key (key 8). This all changes with
CICS/ESA 3.3. With CICS/ESA 3.3 a distinction is made
between CICS and user storage. There are now five DSAs each
with its own storage cushion area: the CDSA (CICS DSA
below the 16-megabyte line), the ECDSA (CICS DSA above
the line), the UDSA (user DSA below the line), the EUDSA
(user DSA above the line), and the ERDSA (a separate area
above the line for read-only programs). This in itself will
afford a certain amount of protection, especially as the ERDSA
will include over 90% of CICS code. The ERDSA has a
storage protect key of 0, the EUDSA and UDSA have a storage
protect key of 9, and the ECDSA and CDSA are assigned 8.

SSSP is invoked through a new SIT parameter
(STGPROT=YES). There are also new SIT parameters to let
users stipulate whether the CWA and/or the TCTUA are to be
held in CICS or user storage, and to specify the amounts of
storage to be allocated to CDSA, ECDSA, UDSA, EUDSA,
and ERDSA, and their associated cushion areas.


THE CICS API

As part of its stated intention of removing users' ability to
access CICS control blocks, CICS/ESA 3.3 will be the last
release of CICS to provide any supported direct addressing of
the CSA and TCA. The CSA and TCA addresses in the
relevant global user exit parameter lists in CICS/ESA 3.1.1
may still be used. There are also over 60 additions to the
EXEC CICS INQ/SET TERMINAL command to allow access
to the most important fields of the TCTTE. On IBM's own
admission, this corrects a major omission on its part.


DISTRIBUTED PROGRAM LINK

CICS/ESA 3.3 embraces IBM's client/server philosophy
through its newly-introduced Distributed Program Link (DPL)
function, which enables one CICS program to call another in a
different region or system, the main benefits of which are to
separate functions (eg presentation logic and resource access)
and incur far less overhead than repeated function shipping. All
the major CICS platforms are supported.


SHARED DATA TABLES FEATURE

Despite the obvious performance benefits to be had, the
number of users implementing the CICS Data Tables facility
has been a considerable disappointment to IBM. Nevertheless,
the Data Tables function has been extended to exploit new
ESA/390 capabilities in improving CICS file sharing between
regions on the same MVS/ESA image by eliminating function
shipping for most read and browse requests. This extension is
named the Shared Data Tables Feature. It also offers a degree
of multi-processor exploitation by running under the requesting
region's TCB in parallel with any activity in the File Owning
Region. The Shared Data Tables Feature can be ordered
separately and will be generally available in the third quarter of
1992.


FRONT END PROCESSING INTERFACE (FEPI)

Driven largely by demands from the financial sector of
industry, IBM has introduced the Front End Processing
Interface (FEPI). FEPI consists of a set of EXEC CICS FEPI
commands and some additional Terminal Control code and
allows new CICS applications to simulate terminal access from
existing IMS and CICS applications. It will not be generally
available until the third quarter 1992, when it will be
automatically shipped to CICS/ESA 3.3 licensees.




