    Purpose of being able to CLIP (change the volser of) a disk pack
                          while it is ONLINE


    IBM allows you to use the ICKDSF program to change the volume
    serial of a disk pack while it is offline.  But they don't give
    you a program to change the volume serial of a pack when it is
    online.  There may be several reasons for that.

    IBM has to worry about more situations than we have to worry
    about.

    If you change the volser of a pack while it is online, the new
    volser does not take effect right away.  You first have to take
    it offline, and then you have to bring it online again.  Then,
    the new volser will be in effect.

    But here is at least one situation in which it is helpful to be
    able to change the volser of a pack while it is online.

1.  A particular pack went bad, and the operators restored that volser
    from a backup onto a volser that was "higher" in collating sequence
    of UCB addresses than the original pack, which was still online.

    The pack that was online could not be forced offline for a number
    of production-related reasons.  An IPL, to put the new pack
    online, would not take effect properly, because the volser of the
    bad pack was lower.  (Maybe now, it would be OK, with the later
    operating system improvements.  At IPL you now have a better
    choice, of which pack, of duplicate volsers, that you want to
    keep online.

    The surest solution would be to rename the bad pack so it would not
    be in effect after the IPL, and the restored pack would be the one
    that you'd get online with no ambiguity.

2.  You could use Fullscreen ZAP from CBT File 300 for this, but this
    is a programmatic solution that takes the guesswork out of the
    process.  And it can be set up to be done by an operator.  Very
    often, the systems programmers set up a procedure for the operators
    that doesn't require much effort on their part, provided there is
    a program which drives the procedure.  ONLCLIP is such a program.

