 all source is in dsn=jcogfs01.asm(jcogfs01)

  pdse listing may be restored via tso command:

     receive inda('jcogfs01.asm(listxmi)')

  pdse object may be restored via tso command:

     receive inda('jcogfs01.asm(objxmi)')

  pdse load lib may be restored via tso command:

     receive inda('jcogfs01.asm(loadxmi)')

 pgm=jcogfs01 reads gtf USR trace records from the zos getmain freemain
 trace file recorded with zos gtf, -1- simulates the getting and freeing
 of the virtual storage, lists errors and mismatches, and reports on the
 remaining memory -2- jcogfs01 then iterates using ipcs to scan any
 svcdumps ( JCL indicated ) and/or the active system in order to list
 unique non-zero pages of remaining storage and the program psws used to
 obtain the storage. jcogfs01 also scans backwards in the dump storage
 for the most common copyright or module separator artifacts in order to
 help identify the storage allocator.

 jcogfs01 needs ETF2 instructions and long displacement facility else
 abend0c1's may occur.  jcogfs01 uses arithmetic displacements.
 jcogfs01 requires 64bit storage. Currently 64bit usage is limited to
 1024MB+129MB+(trace dependent amount usually only a few MBs).  jcogfs01
 is set to max plist level for the IARV64 macro.

 a getmain freemain trace can be initiated by placinga DIAGVS member in
 zos's parmlib and setting this memebr actibe via a "set" command:

   command: t diag=vs

   parmlib member (DIAGVS) example:  VSM TRACE GETFREE(ON)

 then start a Gtf proc to records TYPE=USR trace records.

 stop gtf and use the trace dataset in the INFILE dd statemnt of the
 jcl for pgm=jcogfs01.

 jcogfs01 will issue user abend codes unique to each failure condition.
 do a f "abend1" for abendu0001 in the listing to track down the cause o
 abend 1.

 the included assemble, object and load are at zos 1.11. IARV64 plist
 version is set to max so ABENDDC2-..0032.. may result on lower systems
 execution when complied on higher level systems.

 the IPCS verbx phase needs access to view dump memory, so make sure
 racf access to facility blsactv.addrspac is acc(read) if it is defined.
