DOC FOR THE JES2 EXIT LOADER FOR JES2 VERSION 4.

* Note - The 4.3 version was created by just getting the other one
         to assemble.  Tested 03/31/94 by Sam Golob.  LKED parm
         should now be RMODE=ANY for the 4.3 version.

     This JES2 exit (as shipped) has load module name J005LOAD and
has entry point name E005LOAD.

     This is a JES2 Exit 5 routine (command interceptor exit) which
processes a $LOAD command to dynamically load other JES2 exits
(except itself).  A new exit routine to be reloaded has to be gotten
using the LOAD macro, so all rules for where the LOAD macro can fetch
a copy of the new routine must be followed.  For example, if you are
replacing a version of a JES2 exit in a linklist library, remember to
put the new copy of the exit out there, after renaming the old copy,
and do an F LLA,REFRESH or its equivalent.  Then the loader exit will
pick up the fresh new copy of the particular exit module to be loaded.

     This loader exit has only been tested to reload JES2 exits that
get placed in the JES2 address space.  There are three places where
a JES2 exit can go (in version 4).  These are:

       The JES2 address space ,     (default)
       CSA                    ,
  or   LPA

Exits that have been loaded into CSA or LPA can probably not be
replaced by this exit loader, unless somebody recodes it (your efforts
are welcome--I'd appreciate having an improved product).  You can
check your JES2 parms to make sure your exit isn't loaded like:

         LOADMOD(JES2T08) STORAGE=LPA   or

         LOADMOD(JES2T02) STORAGE=CSA   .


     Command syntax for the $LOAD command is:

 $LOAD -modulnam

where the dash is a fill-in character.  The exit will not find your
module name if the extra character isn't put in.  I didn't take the
time to clean that "problem" up.

     This exit (for JES2 version 4.x) has been recoded and will not
work for previous versions of JES2.  The reason is that the LMT, which
is the Load Module Table that points to the location of all exit
points, has been restructured in version 4.  It is obvious that this
exit depends on altering the LMT to point to another version of the
exit module, which has been loaded into storage previously.

     You can look on file 381 under J005LOAD to get a version of this
code which works for XA, JES2 version 2.2.0.

     If you try and load a module name that has not been defined to
JES2 at warm start time, you will get a message:

 $HASP000  newname   IS NOT IN THE LMT

     If this exit works and reloads a new copy of an exit, you get the
message:

 $HASP000  newname   RELOADED

    (Maybe someone can allow zapping a new name into the LMT as a
future project (changing the syntax of the $LOAD command).  But it is
not there now, and maybe it shouldn't be.)

     Please refer questions or problems to:

         Sam Golob
         P.O. Box 906
         Tallman, NY  10982-0906

         845-362-5843  fax      sbgolob@attglobal.net

     I would like to acknowledge the help of my friend W. Jim Williams
(who knows JES2 pretty well) for his assistance in getting this exit to
work properly.  Thanks Jim.
