      Notes about this convenient Message Display Facility


Sometimes, when you are involved in servicing one, or several,
components of the MVS operating system very often, you might like
a convenient (and very quick) way of displaying the messages from
that component, under ISPF.  Then this system is something you can
use.

This system is also very flexible, and the display capability is
not limited to IBM messages, but you can make arbitrary members
of the "message pds" and display them anytime, by entering their
"member name" in the UMSG display panel.

The messages are displayed, using either ISPF Browse, or the REVIEW
TSO command from File 134 (load modules on File 135) of the CBT Tape.
The REXX exec which uses ISPF Browse (in this pds) is member UMSG.
The REXX exec which uses the REVIEW TSO command, is member UMSGR.
The panel using ISPF Browse, is called MESAJP, and the one using
REVIEW, is called MESAJP1.  (Sam Golob is responsible for the REVIEW
adaptation.  Ugur did all the work, though.  It was only a slight
change from Ugur's original REXX.  SG)

If you didn't remember the exact name of the message, you can ask for
a partial message, by using an asterisk as a wild card.  For example,
if you want to display a list of all ARC**** members in your
MESAJ.PDS, then type ARC* in the pop-up panel.  (The procedure for
the REVIEW adaptation, is that if you got the message id a bit wrong,
and a blank REVIEW screen pops up, then you can enter the DIR
subcommand of REVIEW, to get a pds directory so you can find the
right message id.)

  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

This package is very simply constructed, and is also easy to install.

To install this package, just copy the UMSG and UMSGR execs into your
SYSPROC or SYSEXEC library for your TSO session.  And copy the two
panels (member MESAJP, or the MESAJP1 panel if you want to use the
REVIEW implementation) into a panel library in your ISPPLIB
concatenation.  The messages themselves will be put (later) into an
FB-80 partitioned dataset that you create, which may get to be rather
large, epending on the number of IBM (or other) messages that you may
want to load into it.

You must customize the UMSG and UMSGR execs to point to your message
library pds (not to my library).  Then you load the message library
pds with the IBM messages (I'll tell you how to do it, below), and
then you run the UMSG exec.  The messages library pds is usually
named 'prefix.MESAJ.PDS' , but you can name it anything you want,
as long as the UMSG or UMSGR execs point to it.

If you are using the REVIEW command (member UMSGR) to display the
messages, then you must install it.  The easiest way to do that, is
to get CBT Tape File 135 (from www.cbttape.org , or from a CBT Tape)
and copy every member starting with REV****, and all their aliases,
to an ISPLLIB or STEPLIB, that is accessible to your TSO session.

I have made an ISPF command table entry, called UMSG (abbreviated
to 2 characters) to invoke UMSG, so all I have to do, on my system,
is to type UM on the command line, and press enter.  Then I get
the MESAJP panel window, and I enter the member name of the message
I want to look up.  It is very simple to use.

Unfortunately, the actual IBM messages are copyrighted, and their
explanations may also change once in a while.  So we can not
include the actual IBM messages in this file, but we will tell you
how you can get them, if you have Bookmanager installed under MVS.

Just look at the $MESAJ2 member in this pds, and you will see how
to generate the members of your 'userid.MESAJ.PDS', for whichever
messages that you want to extract from Bookmanager.

We have included several sample (non-IBM) messages to include in your
'userid.MESAJ.PDS' so you can test how the system works.  These are
in the member (of this pds) called SAMPMSGS.  The member is a pds, in
IEBUPDTE or PDSLOAD unloaded format, and contains (at least) a member
called ABEND (displaying most of the common ABEND codes) and REVIEW
(which is a HELP member for the REVIEW TSO command).  If you also
include these members in your 'userid.MESAJ.PDS' dataset, then you
can access them by entering ABEND or REVIEW in the UMSG panel.

Best of luck to all of you.....


   Ugur Cilesiz
   Sam Golob                   August 08, 2002



