Note:  This is IBM documentation for their sample code
       which was found at:

   http://www.ibm.com/servers/eserver/zseries/zos/racf/racseq.html

       Note their disclaimer at the end, which allows us to copy
       their code and distribute it here.  Their sample code is
       found in member @IBMCODE in this pds.

--------------------------------------------------------------------

        The RACSEQ command

RACSEQ is a sample TSO command which demonstrates the profile
extract functions of the R_admin RACF callable service
(IRRSEQ00). The command accepts a class name and a profile name
and displays the contents of every field in the profile. It
differs from LISTUSER and LISTGRP in that the output is displayed
in a simplified and somewhat architected manner which lends
itself more easily to consumption by programs; for example, by a
REXX exec using the OUTTRAP function.

The RACSEQ package consists of these files:

    * Assembler source code for the RACSEQ utility in text format
      (use this format for casual viewing)
    * Assembler source code for the RACSEQ utility in TSO
      TRANSMIT format (use this format for installing)
    * Documentation in PDF format

You can download these files either by using your browser or by
using anonymous file transfer protocol (ftp). From your browser,
select "file" and "save as". For anonymous ftp, use the site
ftp.software.ibm.com. RACSEQ can be found in the directory
/eserver/zseries/zos/racf/racseq/. Be sure to FTP the TSO
TRANSMIT and text files to your MVS environment into data sets
which are in fixed-blocked format and which have a record length
of 80.

We welcome your comments and questions on the RACSEQ utility.
Please direct them to the RACF-L mailing list. Subscription
information for RACF-L can be found from the RACF-L Discussion
List Page.

        Disclaimers

This program contains code made available by IBM Corporation on
an "AS-IS" basis. Any one receiving this program is considered to
be licensed under IBM copyrights to use the IBM-provided code in
any way he or she deems fit, including copying it and
redistributing it, except that it may be neither sold nor
incorporated within a product that is sold.  No license under any
IBM patents or patent applications is to be implied from this
copyright license.

The software is provided "as-is", and IBM disclaims all
warranties, express or implied, including but not limited to
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular
purpose.

This page was last updated July 2006.
