                        INTRODUCTION

     This file contains (roughly) the original drafts of my column:
"MVS Tools and Tricks of the Trade" since its inception until any
such time as I am able to update this file.  There are now approxi-
mately twelve years' worth of articles here.

     Please bear several factors in mind.  The early articles, which
were written several years ago, may contain somewhat obsolete infor-
mation at times, and certainly they contain some obsolete phone
numbers.  I have tried a bit to go in and fix a few phone numbers,
but there are many that are old.  There are a few "dated" things;
please read past them.

     You have the "advantage", reading articles from this file (as
opposed to reading the articles directly from the magazine) of
seeing these articles before our esteemed editors have gotten their
(sweet but grubby) hands on them.

     This material was built from the files that I submitted to
"Technical Support" right when I wrote the articles.  They were the
original material.  As such, they included my editorial notes and my
personal comments to the editors.  I have tried to expunge all of
those marginal notes, but I may have failed to do this completely.

     I am especially sensitive about my editorial notes, because the
editorial staff of "Technical Support" are a group of hard-working and
dedicated professionals, and they have, by and large, done an
excellent job on my writing.  But here, you ain't gonna see any of
their work, I hope.  Editors write things, and the reader thinks the
author wrote them.  What power!  THIS IS MY STUFF.  If you want to see
THEIR stuff, take out your old copies of the magazine.

     The editors, because of space considerations, have often made
me shorten my articles after I had submitted them.  Often, especially
in the last two years, I have had to shorten the content "on the fly".
But here, you have most of the articles as I actually submitted them,
with the full collection of illustrations, and such.

     My earnest hope is that you'll all be able to derive SOME
benefit from this file.  Use it all well.

     Good luck.  (See you next month. (heh heh))

                      Very sincerely yours,
                      Sam Golob

 P.S.  Please feel free to contact me.  I am at:

          sbgolob@cbttape.org


