                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         SEPTEMBER 2000

This article was never published, and therefore does not belong to
NaSPA.

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@attglobal.net and/or sbgolob@aol.com.
The Online CBT Tape web site has its own URL.  However, it can also
be reached from the "Members Only" section of www.naspa.net .


THE JOY OF "SHARE"

      Much of my "edge" as an MVS Systems Programmer comes from
networking with other professionals in my field.  Why, and how, does
that give me an advantage?  Today, I'll tell you about it.

      Just like the rest of the computing world, MVS (aka OS/390) is
constantly changing and developing too.  MVS is a large part of a
larger world.  Everyone has to exert some effort to keep up with
"developments".  It's almost a requirement for us to find out about
the changes, or we'll quickly get left behind.

      So we can talk about approaches to deal with the problem.  We
have a finite amount of time.  Most of our time is spent on our normal
workload.  Perhaps we have a fraction of our time which we can devote
to reading periodicals, IBM announcements, and the like.  We can also
subscribe to the IBM-MAIN newsgroup or other news groups to see what
other people's problems are (see my April 1998 column).  However,
practically speaking, there's the question:  "How can I find out enough
information about new developments that affect my own position, without
losing too much time from the rest of my life?"

      I have a solution to that.  Many systems programmers know about
this solution, and have taken full advantage of it.  On the other hand,
a surprisingly large number do not realize the extent to which they,
and their shops, can benefit.  My answer is to take advantage of the
concentrated, one-week exposure to the enormous quantity of raw knowledge
that the semi-annual SHARE conferences offer.


What is SHARE?

      SHARE is an organization which was started well over 40 years ago
as an IBM user group, and a forum for users to suggest improvements to
IBM products.  Many of the components of MVS or OS/390 that we've come
to "know and love", such as SMF among many others, came about through
the efforts of IBM customers such as you and me, submitting
"requirements" for product improvements to IBM through the SHARE
meetings.  Sometimes submitting user requirements wasn't enough, to
get IBM moving on improving its products.  Often we had to organize
SHARE committees to campaign to IBM, and to work with IBM's product
developers on a personal basis.

      Here's an example that's close to my own heart, and in which I
participated personally.  Working through SHARE, I myself was
instrumental in getting IBM to create the High Level Assembler, which
incorporates over 50 improvements to Assembler H that were written by a
private individual, Greg Mushial.  For many years, IBM rejected nearly
all the requirements we submitted for improving the Assembler.  We
couldn't get them to budge, even through the "requirements" route.  We
formed the SHARE Assembler Committee, with the express purpose of
getting IBM to incorporate Greg Mushial's modifications into their
Assembler H program.

      We negotiated with IBM for several years on this matter, using
the SHARE Assembler Committee as our forum.  Finally, through the great
efforts of several individuals--one inside IBM (John Ehrman), and about
a dozen outside of IBM (notably Bill Winters), IBM relented, and the
world is now enjoying the pleasure of using the High Level Assembler.
This improvement makes Assembler coding easier and more error-free, and
every time I write an Assembler program (quite often nowadays), I'm
very thankful to all the individuals who contributed.  It was
accomplished through SHARE.

      SHARE doesn't just deal with MVS or OS/390.  There's a large UNIX
contingent; RS/6000 and PC practitioners are well represented.  VM,
Operations Management, and Technical Support Management also have a
presence at SHARE.  Networking, TCP/IP (nowadays an essential part of
OS/390), MQ Series, DB2 and various database groups, running on all
kinds of platforms, and many other parts of the modern computing world
are active at SHARE.  If you are working in one field, such as MVS, and
you need information about any other computing area that could touch on
your work, you'll almost surely find knowledgeable people at a SHARE
conference, who can answer any of your questions.  I once brought about
40 questions from people in my shop, to SHARE, and by the end of the
week (after much digging), I had answers to all of them.

      Another under-publicized feature of SHARE is the accessibility
to IBM personnel that it provides.  Normally, IBM guards customer
accessibility to its developers and Level 2 people.  At SHARE, all these
groups are represented (in human form), and IBM's own SHARE attendees
are given permission to hand out their business cards to anyone who asks
for them.  It makes sense why IBM does this.  SHARE is the place where
IBM looks for direct customer input, so their people have to be able to
talk to the customers.  I've formed many contacts and friendships with
IBM personnel, through this means.  I've also solved many difficult
system problems, with speed and dispatch, by knowing whom to call.

      I recently started working with someone I had known from seeing
frequently at SHARE meetings.  She told me she used to work for a large
company.  That company wanted IBM to make certain improvements in CICS
and in other components.  So they sent a sizable contingent of people to
SHARE, and asked them to sit on certain committees, to influence IBM to
make the changes they wanted.  Needless to say, this was effective; IBM
made many improvements because of them.  And all the other IBM
installations are benefiting from that company's policy as well.

      In recent years, the whole gamut of the non-IBM computing world
has also gained a presence at SHARE.  SHARE is no longer a "purely IBM"
organization.  Through the SHARE Exhibition Area, vendors from all walks
of computing fill the SHARE exhibition hall with useful information
about computing tools to solve your shop's problems.  (Even NaSPA has
a booth--shhhhh!)


SHARE Membership

      SHARE Membership is different now, than it was in former times
(10 or more years ago).  There are no longer any hardware requirements
necessary for an organization to join SHARE.  (In former days, you had
to be running a big-enough mainframe.)  There's also a very relaxed
requirement for sending a representative to the SHARE meetings.  A
member orgainization used to have to send at least one representative
to a SHARE conference, once a year, or the membership would be revoked.
Nowadays, this requirement is much relaxed.  SHARE management is very
aware that many companies have limited conference budgets nowadays.

      For a company (or an individual) to become a member of SHARE, all
you have to do is fill out an application, and plunk down a one-time
cost of $250.  This can even be done online, through SHARE's web site
at www.share.org .  Since there's no longer any hardware requirement, an
individual with a one-person company can also become a member.  I'm a
member of SHARE, myself.  As a SHARE member, even if you can't attend a
SHARE meeting (i.e. conference), you get all the SHARE conference
proceedings on cd-rom, and you get all the SHARE notices and
announcements.  You also get access to the "Members Only" portion of the
SHARE web site.  (With the latest SHARE conference, individuals can now
get their own "members only" userids.  If you attend a conference, you
get your own userid and password emailed to you.)


Attending the SHARE Conferences

      The SHARE conferences are now held twice a year, once in the
winter, and once in the summer.  The two spring and fall "minor
conferences", which were largely for organizational purposes, have now
been eliminated, since SHARE's member organizational work can now be
done electronically, through email communication.  There's a conference
fee, and unless you live in the same city where the conference is being
held, you have to pay a hotel bill and transportation expense.  However,
the cost for a company to send somebody to SHARE is often less that that
of a class, or a different conference.  Usually, the benefits are
greater.

      This SHARE conference in Boston was my thirteenth SHARE.  The
first four were paid for by my employer, and I've footed the bill for
the last nine, myself.  I think it's worth that much sacrifice!

      Prior planning is absolutely essential to get the most out of a
SHARE conference.  Since so many computing disciplines and areas are
represented, each time slot has from 20 or 50 different sessions you
can choose from.  A company can benefit by sending several different
people from several different areas, to cover the ground.  For each
individual, planning pays.  You should download the SHARE conference
scheduler program from the www.share.org , and spend a good few hours
working out your schedule, before you even get there.  There are about
six normal session slots scheduled each day, for the entire week, until
Friday noon.

      Evenings can be spent enjoyably working, too.  It used to be every
night, but now, three nights a week are given to SCIDS, which is some
acronym indicating Social Contact time.  Everybody can go to a big
ballroom, which is open for 5 hours, and mix with anybody else, from
perhaps a different discipline, or perhaps from the same one.  If you
didn't get a chance to meet somebody, because you were each going to
different sessions all day, you can make up to meet and talk at SCIDS.

      In the early evenings, people organize what are called BOF (Birds
of a Feather) sessions informally.  At the beginning of the SHARE week,
anyone wishing to organize a BOF session will post a request on the
SHARE bulletin board, and if there are enough signers to the request, a
room and a time will be assigned for the session.

      Through all these means, a company can send its people to SHARE
and get all their questions answered, even the cross-discipline ones.
And the answers will probably come from an authority in the field.  I
think that most veteran SHARE attendees will agree that SHARE is not a
holiday, but a treasure-trove of computing knowledge and knowledeable
people, to be drawn upon for months and years to come.


Benefits for the Employer.

      To me, it seems very common for most employers to miss the point
of SHARE.  They might send people to IBM conferences, but they forget
that the information presented, though plentiful, is also sanitized.
You don't get the "gotchas" from users with experience.  And you don't
always speak to the developers.  Information that IBM doesn't want
mentioned, is not imparted.  At SHARE, you get it all!  People
generally aren't inhibited at SHARE.  Even the IBM'ers will tend to be
much more "personal", relaxed, and frank than they usually are, to us
customers.

      The enormous cross-discipline presence at SHARE is also largely
underestimated.  At a SHARE conference, there is an tremendous
accumulation of raw knowledge in one place.  In past years, I've been
sent to SHARE as an "MVS person", and I've brought back VM and PC
knowledge as well.  Nowadays, with all the other computing systems, and
with everybody doing UNIX and complex networking, there are plenty of
answers at any SHARE meeting.  A company can never bring an employee to
any other conference or class, and give that employee the same exposure
to information and clear answers, as there is at any one full week of
SHARE meetings.  It's next to impossible.  I'll challenge anyone to
tell me where you can spend one week and get more exposure to the
answers you need, than at one SHARE week!

      I hope this month's column whets your interest.  Even if you
can't go to the next conference, you can start finding out what SHARE
is about by looking at www.share.org .  But the raw excitement of a
SHARE meeting is inimitable and irreplaceable.  To me, it's a "must"
for every MVS practitioner to get to a SHARE conference at least once.

