
                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                           June 1992

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      Lakewood, New Jersey 08701



PUBLIC SOFTWARE TAPES REVISITED.

      It has been a long time since we did an overview of public
domain software tapes and stressed their immense value to a practicing
MVS systems programmer.  Some of these tapes have been improved
through significant new contributions in the past year or two.  I can
personally testify that the CBT MVS Utilities Tape has come a great
distance in the past two years.

      Deemphasizing the multiple ways in which the public tapes can
help your shop, I'd like to concentrate this month on the many more
ways they can help you personally, in your growth of understanding
and breadth of system knowledge.  I'd like to say a few words on how
it's possible to use these marvelous materials to your own best
personal advantage.  Of course, your shop will undoubtedly benefit,
but let's concentrate on you first, for now.


LEARNING BY CONNECTING TO OTHERS.

      A new user of a public tape such as the CBT MVS Tape, is first
impressed by its size.  The current CBT Tape, Version 329 as of this
writing, almost fills a 2400 foot tape reel.  The next thing one
notices is the fact that nearly every software contribution is
accompanied by a name and an address.  Inside each individual
contribution file, there is usually also a phone number.  In my
experience, contributors to these tapes are gratified that their
efforts are being noticed by others.  Having called hundreds of
contributors over many years, I can accurately say that none of them
was ever impolite to me in any way.  I have made many friends among
them.  This can happen to you too.

      Then there's the knowledge.  That's really the bottom line.
You can find all sorts of programs that do wonders to utilize various
facilities of the MVS operating system and data management.  Nearly
all of them have source code.  You are free to study them, try them,
and fix them.  It's like bringing a ten-year-old kid into "Toys R Us"
and telling him or her:  "It's all for nothing.  Just take anything
you want off the shelf and put it together.  Then you can keep it and
it's yours!"

      A lot of system programmers have done a lot of work for their
own installations.  However, people employed by large companies which
are not in the software business, can't enjoy having feedback from
a group of users outside their company walls.  But with a contribution
to a large tape, they can get such satisfaction and conversely, they
can also gain access to work from hundreds of other people.

      If your shop doesn't want to buy software tools for you, you
needn't despair and make a fuss about it.  Access to these tapes will
give you an enormous pool of software tools of every description.  AND
you can usually see their source code, to learn how the work is done.
In some areas, certain utilities on these tapes are better than any
vendor software that is currently available.


WHAT TAPES ARE THERE?

      I don't know about all the tapes out there, but I know about
quite a few.  In Figure 1, there's a pretty good collection of names,
addresses and phone numbers to start with.  These tapes will keep you
busy for quite some time.

      The "granddaddy" of MVS software tapes is the CBT MVS Tape,
started by Arnold Casinghino and built by him for 15 years.  I am the
current editor of the CBT Tape, having taken it over from Arnie.  I
"inherited" quite a bundle of material from him.  In terms of general
coverage of MVS needs, the CBT MVS Tape is by far the most
comprehensive single source.  The CBT Tape has 472 files, many of
which have large collections of tools within them.  Getting a current
CBT Tape should be the highest priority for every MVS systems
programmer.

      I don't have space in this article to detail the relative merits
of all the tapes mentioned in Figure 1.  The list is there for you to
explore.  Of special note are the JES2 Share Tape and the NASPA VIP
MVS Tape.

      I have heard of some tapes from "abroad", such as the UK GUIDE
Tape, which aren't readily available in the United States.  I would
like to hear from any readers outside the United States who have such
a user-contributed MVS software collection available to them.  Some of
the most useful programs I know, have originated from countries other
than the United States.  I once was the beneficiary, through a NasTEC
conference, of a user exit commented in Spanish!  Thanks, Jhony.  Many
of my good tools come from Australia.  Thanks, Greg and friends.
Let's do some more of this!  Thanks to all of you.


USING THE TAPES TO IMPROVE YOUR KNOWLEDGE.

      There are several ways to "break into" the tapes for your own
knowledge.  One way is to print out the tape documentation, put it into
a binder, and leaf through it, looking for things to install that seem
interesting to you.  This is good general practice.  On the CBT Tape
(where I'm the editor) I purposely added a section describing what to
do first.  That section is part of the CBT Tape documentation.

      I remember taking the documentation file from my first CBT Tape,
in a binder, to the beach.  Among our "social friends", upon seeing
the binder, the nearly universal comment was:  "Computers.  Yecch.
Why don't you read a good novel, or at least a newspaper."  (That was
before PC's became really popular.)  I have courage in my convictions.
I told them the "Toys R Us" story.  Then I ignored them.  I figured I
probably got more benefit from my reading than they did from theirs
that day.

      Another way of getting started is to have a problem at work.
Sometimes your boss will come and tell you to write a program or an
exit to solve the problem.  If you have a CBT Tape or a JES2 Tape
around, you may not have to write the program from scratch, but you
can save a lot of time by lifting someone else's code.  There are some
"purists" out there who might think it's more "honorable" to write all
your own code.  But practically speaking, that's not what your
companies pay you for, unless there's no other way.  Using (and
improving) someone else's wheel takes less time, gets the solution to
the users more quickly, and costs the company less pay.  It's also a
good way to become more familiar with the tape.  That happens by
itself once you're looking in it for something that might help with
your problem.  You just happen to notice other stuff too.

       There are some side rewards to all this exploring.  Very
important, is the personal experience you acquire as a software
evaluator.  It is possible to become a valued beta tester for one or
more software houses, especially when you develop sharpness at the
process from long practice with free materials.  This gives you
exposure to more vendor software than you or your company can normally
afford.  You might also get the opportunity to make some extra money
in a side job, doing this.  A little extra work often yields a lot of
extra dividends.

      Then finally, there is benefit to be gained from the pure study
of code.  Hard work yields knowledge, experience, and ultimate results.
Most of the good MVS people whom I know have studied other people's
code a lot, besides writing their own.  Haven't you ever wondered how
a certain program could achieve some marvelous result?  Haven't you
ever asked, "I wish I could see the see the source code"?  Well, now
you can.  On the public software tapes, almost all of the source code
is available.


SPREADING THE WORD.

      There are two schools of thought to this.  I've seen some
"system doctors" who look at a problem, "do some magic", and keep
the solution to themselves.  I myself do not subscribe to that
approach.  Early in my career, I was blessed with an especially fine
friend and mentor.  I'd call him every day for several years after
I was working on my own, and I'd run all my problems of the day
past him.  It paid off.  Even if I'd solved a problem satisfactorily
without his help, he would invariably add a lot of extra insight into
the issue.  My knowledge became much more rounded because of his
input.

      Later, when my circle of knowledgeable friends became wider, I
discovered that each of them was able to provide a unique "new view"
to any situation.  Different people would look at an issue from
different angles.  Each person's opinion would complement the other
person's view, and would shed new light for me, the onlooker.  I don't
know where I would have been today, without years of these
conversations behind me.

      Consequently, I try and help other people by applying some of my
own experiences to their circumstances.  Hearing other people's
problems gives you broader insight into your own, while it is also
helping them.  You earn yourself new friends, and lay a foundation of
helpers for your own future.  Every person in this world is valuable in
some way.  You never know when the help you gave them, will come back
to you later at some unexpected time.  I'm always going to be better
and more experienced in some way, by helping someone else.

      The public domain tapes are an extension to this latter
approach.  And they work especially well if you take the time to
call the contributor of the tape file you're using.  Most contributors
feel flattered and are very helpful when they're called.  You'll learn
a lot and make new friends among them for the future.


IN SUMMARY.

      Finishing this discussion is for each of you to do on your own.
I'd say, the first step is to order one or more of the tapes.  The
addresses for inquiry are in Figure 1.  Follow the "yellow brick
road" we've laid out here, and you'll know more about the benefits of
this process than I could ever tell you.

      Good luck in all your endeavors.  See you next month.

  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

FIGURE 1.   This is a list of addresses and phone numbers you can call
            to acquire some of the available public tapes.  Most of
            the tapes have no restrictions as to who can get them.
            Once you've acquired some of these tapes, you can make
            copies and distribute them to your friends.  That divides
            the handling costs.  Remember that many of the tapes are
            updated often.  You can split the ordering among several
            installations.  When a new version comes out, you can all
            obtain copies.  Several NaSPA Chapters maintain tape
            collections and distribute tapes at their meetings.  It
            pays to go to the chapter meetings, or to send someone
            there.



  1.  THE CBT MVS UTILITIES TAPE - This tape is updated often.  Try
            to make sure you have the latest one.  And save the older
            ones too, so you're sure you have source for everything
            you've installed.  You can order the CBT Tape from:

                  NaSPA
                  4811 S. 76th Street
                  Suite 210
                  Milwaukee, WI 53220-4362
                  (414) 423-2420

            Or from:

                  Fred Robinson
                  Share Program Library Agency  (S.P.L.A)
                  University of Miami
                  146 Unger Building
                  1365 Memorial Drive
                  Coral Gables, FL  33124
                  (305) 284-6257

            This address is very important.  You can order most
            of the SHARE-affiliated tapes from S.P.L.A.

  2.  THE JES2 SHARE TAPE  -  Order the JES2 Share Tape from:

                  Jack Schudel
                  Northeast Regional Data Center (NERDC)
                  Room 233 Space Sciences Research Building
                  University of Florida
                  Gainesville, FL 32611
                  (904) 392-4601

  3.  THE JES3 SHARE/GUIDE TAPE  -  Order the JES3 Tape from:

                  Alan Field
                  Wetterau Inc.
                  345 Dunn Road
                  Florissant, MO 63031-7995
                  (314) 839-7040

  4.  THE NASPA VIP TAPES  -  Order NaSPA's tapes from NaSPA
            (address above).

  5.  THE SHARE MVS TAPE  -  You can order the MVS SHARE Tape from:

                  Fred Robinson
                  SPLA - University of Miami
                  Unger Building
                  1365 Memorial Drive
                  Coral Gables, FL 33124
                  (305) 284-6257

  6.  THE L.A. MVS USERS GROUP TAPE  -  The administrator of the
            L.A. MVS Users Group tape is:

                  Tom Beuthin
                  (310) 812-4421

  7.  THE CICS SHARE TAPE and the PL/I SHARE TAPE - These can be
            obtained from S.P.L.A.  (address above).

Be ambitious.  Good luck in your efforts.

