                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          August 1992

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      Lakewood, New Jersey 08701



SOME ASSEMBLER THOUGHTS - THE NEW HIGH LEVEL ASSEMBLER - PART II.

      This month, I'd like to continue talking about IBM's new "High
Level Assembler", product number 5696-234.  This new assembler, which
is designed to replace Assembler H Version 2 and the DOS/VSE Assembler,
has largely arisen from user protests and prodding of IBM, mainly
through SHARE and the other IBM user groups.  Most of that fuss was
raised because of the existence of the magnificent "SLAC modifications"
to Assembler H, a package of about 50 enhancements written by Gregory
J. Mushial.  These mods made the reading of assembly listings and the
debugging of assembler code far easier.  People wanted to know why IBM
wouldn't incorporate the SLAC mods into their own product and bring
their benefits to everybody.

      Well now they have.  In this month's column, I'd like to
summarize more of the new assembler's features, so you can see the
clear advantages to all assembler programmers now available in this
new assembler product.

      As an aside, I must also state unequivocally that IBM's "OCO"
policy would have made the development of the SLAC mods impossible,
had it been in effect ten years earlier.  Greg Mushial could only have
written the SLAC mods from the source code to Assembler H.  It is
probable that IBM would still be sleeping on the issue of Assembler
enhancements, had source code not been available for skilled users
like Greg Mushial to "play with".  It is unfortunate that the new
High Level Assembler, or HLASM for short, is distributed as "Object
Code Only".  This stifles further change.  You users out there....
Keep protesting to IBM to lessen its OCO policy!


HLASM EXTENSIONS.  LET'S START.

      There's too much that's new in HLASM to mention in this small
space.  We'll try to list the various kinds of extension to the
assembler's features.  We systems programmers will find that coding and
fixing code is going to be a lot more exciting soon.  HLASM will give
us lots more help than we've been used to getting.

      John Ehrman, in IBM's HLASM Presentation Guide for speakers,
mentions the following nine categories of assembler improvement in
HLASM.  These are:  development support functions, tool and environment
support, new and extended language, new system variable symbols,
usability-accuracy-readability, documentation enhancements, interfaces
to languages and systems, new and extended options, other enhancements.
We'll try to briefly summarize what's involved in some of these areas,
as the space permits.

      Development support functions are many.  The idea is to show the
programmer more ways of seeing if the program is correct.  Internally,
the assembler "knows" about these facts.  Previously, it just didn't
tell us.  Now, we can make the assembler talk.  Most of the features
in this category came from the SLAC mods.  That just goes to indicate
how good the SLAC mods are (and why we pressured IBM so much).

      In this category:  There is the Macro and Copy Code Source
Catalog, which tells you the dataset and volume that every macro and
copy member came from.  Previously, there was no simple way to know
which macros were called during an assembly.  Now we know what their
names are, and which libraries they came from.  There's a DSECT cross
reference showing every DSECT definition, its relocation id and its
total length.  The DSECT cross reference helps us track the intermix
of CSECT code and DSECT code in an assembly listing.  Another feature
is a modification to the symbol cross reference.  The symbol cross
reference now flags which line numbers are branch targets, and which
labels have been directly modified by the code.  We can thus follow
the program flow better.  For better tracking of addressability, there
is a complete USING Map, which gives the history, length, and
placement of all USING and DROP statements.  We'll talk more about
addressability help later.

      The RSECT statement, to control re-entrancy checking on a CSECT
by CSECT basis, has been documented and cleaned up.  With the new
PCONTROL option, you can now override PRINT NOGEN and other print
suppression code statements without changing the source code.  Now,
you'll be able to see all the macro expansions with a minimum of effort
if you want them.  End-of-assembly summary has been enhanced to show
you a lot of information about performance and the system on which the
assembly ran.  Finally, the old LIBMAC option has been reinstated.
LIBMAC prints the actual macro source code at the first point of each
macro's expansion in the listing.  Sometimes in debugging, you'd like
to have that information handy.

      The idea behind "tool and environment support" is be to able to
interface the assembler with other tools.  With HLASM, there are lots
of new ways for other programs to get to the assembler's data.

      HLASM's principal interface tool is the optional SYSADATA data
file.  This file contains many types of records concerning the
assembly.  We mentioned their particulars last month.  The idea of
SYSADATA is similar to SMF.  The SMF dataset contains various types of
records, which are raw data pertaining to many aspects of operating
system and program execution.  Similarly, the SYSADATA file retains
many types of raw data from an assembly run, in the form of records of
different types.  These records may be input to post-processing
programs of the user's design, just like SMF records are.  With the
SYSADATA file as the assembler's "official" external interface,
assembly listing "scanner programs" shouldn't be needed anymore.

      Other new interface tools are the exit points.  Each ddname
connected with an assembly can now be controlled by a user exit.  IBM
has provided a new EXITCTL assembler option to be a central control
point for user exits to ddnames.  You can optionally regulate all I/O
flow to and from the assembler.  Thus, you can now control the
assembler in ways that were impossible before.  The assembler, instead
of doing only what "it wants", can now do much more of what "you
want".

      Last but not least in the "tools interface" category is the new
ASA option.  The ASA option causes the assembler to print its listings
using ASA print control characters instead of "machine" print control
characters.  For example, such control would be useful for integrating
assembler listings with report distribution packages that expect ASA
print control.


EXTENDED LANGUAGE AND NEW SYSTEM VARIABLE SYMBOLS.

      In this category, I'm leaving the best for last.  But we'll also
get a lot of help from what's first.

      HLASM supports some nice cosmetic changes to the assembler that
should have happened years ago.  You can now put blank lines into
assembly source, and they get treated as "SPACE 1" the way they should
be.  Lower and mixed case input is now possible under option control.
There seems to be more to this than meets the eye.  When you get a
working copy of HLASM for yourself, look into the issue of mixed case
assembler input in more detail.

      We'll mention some more "little things".  There are lots of
extensions to the use of literals now.  Literals can now be used as
relocatable terms in expressions.  There is a lot of relaxation in
SETA, SETB, and SETC.  SETA, SETB, and SETC will now take previously
EQUated values as operands, and there's much more extension in that
area.

      A general tendency in HLASM (taken from the SLAC mods) is that a
lot of things which had only been permissible in macro coding, can now
also be done in open code.  References to T', L', S', and I' are
allowed in ordinary symbols, SETC symbols, and literals.  All may
appear in conditional assembly statements, both in macros and in open
code.  Another improvement is that the SYSPARM operand can now be 255
characters in length instead of being limited to eight characters.
There are lots more of these "little language extensions", and they
can all help us in some way.

      There are many new system variable symbols to help the
programmer control what can be placed in the object code of a program.
In order to fit this discussion into its allotted space, I've listed
many of those in Figure 1, and we won't mention them here.


"USING" EXTENSIONS AND HELP WITH ADDRESSABILITY CONCERNS.

      In the category of assembly language extensions, I've left the
"biggie" for last.  The enhanced control to USING and DROP that was
featured in the SLAC mods, was the highest priority assembler
requirement presented to IBM by the SHARE Assembler committee.  Any
experienced assembler programmer knows the frustration inherent in
"addressability problems".  The help offered in that area by the SLAC
mods, and now by HLASM, is legendary.

      Let's mention two new addressability diagnostic tools that are
now provided.  First, there is a global "USING Map" that can be
produced in an assembly listing.  This USING Map details all the USING,
DROP, "PUSH USING" and "POP USING" statements in the whole program.
The USING Map is produced under control of the "USING" assembler
options.  Second:  on each page of the program listing, all current
active USINGs are printed below the page header.  You don't have to
search for active USINGs any more.  They're at the top of every page.
This feature is under control of the PRINT(UHEAD) assembler option.
In addition to these two listing tools, new error messages have been
introduced to flag programmer errors having to do with USING
statements.  You now have a far better chance of catching obscure
program bugs having to do with the active addressing registers.

      All those new tools help us with addressability diagnosis, but
they are not language extensions.  The constructs of "Labeled USINGs"
and "Dependent USINGs" provide new assembler language relief for
problems of addressability.  Labeled USINGs and Dependent USINGs
can also help greatly to reduce the number of registers being tied up
for addressing purposes.

      What are Labeled USINGs?  Superficially, these are USING
instructions that have an expression in the name field, but otherwise
they look like ordinary USINGs.  See Figure 2 for a quick look at the
new USING types.

      Labeled USINGs are independent of ordinary USINGs and can
coexist with them, even though they both employ the same base
register(s).  When an ordinary USING is DROPped, a coexisting Labeled
USING remains in force.  One idea behind Labeled USINGs is that the
same data area can be addressed by different registers at the same
time.  A reference to a symbol in the USING range is then "qualified"
to associate the symbol with the appropriate label.  See Figure 2 for
an example of this new stuff.

      Dependent USINGs allow the second operand of a USING statement
to be a relocatable expression instead of a register.  As long as the
expression is resolved by a prior ordinary USING, the dependent USING
is resolved too.  Dependent USINGs help you very much when you have a
long string of different data areas that are all within one base USING
range.  You don't have to tie up any additional registers to map all
the areas.

      These two constructs can be used together, and you can have
Labeled Dependent USINGs.  The DROP instruction has been enhanced
correspondingly, to undo all of the addressing relationships created
by the new USING structures.  When you get your copy of HLASM, you'll
see that this is neat stuff, and it will greatly assist in your
programming efforts.


CONCLUSION.

      IBM sometimes will actually act when prodded enough.  HLASM is
a good product.  You should go out and get it, or at least know about
its existence.  I believe HLASM is only an upgrade charge from
Assembler H Version 2, even though it has a new product number.  Good
luck in all your work.  See you next month.


  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 1.  NEW SYSTEM VARIABLE SYMBOLS IN HLASM.

           The High Level Assembler has been enhanced to include many
           more system variable symbols.  Some of these are listed
           below.


  &SYSASM          -   The name of the assembler
  &SYSDATC         -   Current date with century included
  &SYSIN_DSN       -   Input dataset name
  &SYSIN_MEMBER    -   Input member name
  &SYSIN_VOLUME    -   Input volume serial
  &SYSJOB          -   Assembly job name
  &SYSSTEP         -   Assembly job step name
  &SYSLIB_DSN      -   Name of library dsn for this macro or copy member
  &SYSLIB_MEMBER   -   Member name for this macro or copy member
  &SYSLIB_VOLUME   -   Volume serial for this macro or copy member
  &SYSNEST         -   Nesting level of invocation for current macro
  &SYSOPT_DBCS     -   Setting of the DBCS option
  &SYSOPT_OPTABLE  -   Name of current opcode table used for this run
  &SYSOPT_RENT     -   Setting of the RENT option
  &SYSSEQF         -   Contents of the sequence field in this statement
  &SYSSTMT         -   The number of the next statement to be processed
  &SYSSTYP         -   Type of the current control section
  &SYSTEM_ID       -   Identification of the operating system
  &SYSVER          -   Assembler's release, version and mod level



  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 2.  CODING EXAMPLES USING LABELED AND DEPENDENT USINGS.


      Example of Labeled USINGs.


PRIOR    USING  IHADCB,R10                      First DCB
NEXT     USING  IHADCB,R2                       Second DCB
         MVC    PRIOR.DCBLRECL,NEXT.DCBLRECL    Move LRECL over
         DROP   PRIOR
         DROP   NEXT


      Example of Dependent USING (unlabeled).


EXAMPLE  CSECT
         USING  EXAMPLE,R10,R11              Ordinary USING
          .
          .
         USING  IHADCB,DCBUT2                Unlabeled Dependent USING
         LH     R2,DCBBLKSI                  Uses R10 or R11 for base
          .
          .
DCBUT2   DCB    DDNAME=SYSUT2,...


      Example of two Labeled Dependent USINGs.


EXAMPLE  CSECT
         USING  EXAMPLE,R10,R11              Ordinary USING
          .
          .
DCB1     USING  IHADCB,DCBUT1                Labeled Dependent USING
DCB2     USING  IHADCB,DCBUT2                Labeled Dependent USING
         MVC    DCB2.DCBBLKSI,DCB1.DCBBLKSI  Uses R10 or R11 for base
          .
          .
DCBUT1   DCB    DDNAME=SYSUT1,...
DCBUT2   DCB    DDNAME=SYSUT2,...


