                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                           July 1992

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      Lakewood, New Jersey 08701



SOME ASSEMBLER THOUGHTS - THE NEW HIGH LEVEL ASSEMBLER - PART I.

      Sometimes you really can change the world.  It's important not
to be cynical about this.  Or even if you are cynical, don't let that
stop you from taking action and doing something about a problem.

      Last week, I was pleasantly shocked by IBM's announcement number
292-244 for their new High Level Assembler, dubbed "HLASM" for short.
I had nearly given up hope.  This new assembler, which is implemented
for MVS, VM, and VSE, claims to incorporate most features of the SLAC
Mods to Assembler H and other enhancements suggested by users (see this
column from the February 1990 issue).  It seems that my 250 phone calls
and many other people's efforts:  those of the SHARE Assembler
Committee, the SHARE Languages Project, the "Assembler Indignation
Project" at GUIDE, SHARE Europe, G.U.I.D.E. Europe and the IBM
representatives to these organizations, were not in vain after all.
IBM's announcement 292-244 acknowledges all of these contributors as
being input to its decision to open up Assembler enhancement.

      John Ehrman, an IBM'er who was pivotal in this effort, has told
me that the keywords most responsible for achieving this change, from
IBM inertia to IBM progress, could be summarized as "diligence" and
"persistence" on the part of the IBM user groups, especially SHARE.
I feel it is only proper that the beneficiaries of the new assembler
(all of you out there) should know a few of the names of people whose
contributions were significant.

      Above all, we must acknowledge Gregory J. Mushial, whose
dissatisfaction with the assembler as it was, led him to write the
"SLAC Mods", a package of about 50 enhancements to the existing
Assembler H.  We must emphasize that Greg could only have done this
job because Assembler H was available in source code, without the
odious OCO restrictions.  For years, IBM rejected user requirements to
absorb the SLAC Mods because it was stated that they were "technically
impossible".  Greg's work openly contradicted that.  These things had
already been achieved, and they could even be benchmarked.

      Next, it is necessary to recognize the monumental work of
Bill Winters, who typed in all the IBM PTF code to Assembler H from
microfiche, and who fitted Greg Mushial's SLAC updates on top of the
"PTF" updated source code.  If it weren't for Bill Winters' work, the
user efforts to influence IBM might have died, because people would
have thought the technical achievements of the SLAC mods were
antiquated.  Bill's work proved that they could be as up-to-date as
IBM's latest production assembler itself.

      Finally, I have to mention a list of names.  Some key helpers
will undoubtedly be left out, and I must apologize for that.  But I
feel obligated to make known some names of people to whom the entire
IBM mainframe community is indebted.  We are equally indebted to many
other people whose names are not mentioned here.

      They are:  John Ehrman, Nancy Wheeler, Gil Lee, Cindy Craine,
and Al Hsia from IBM, whom we dealt with through SHARE.  David Andrews,
Jerry Callen, David Weintraub, Bill Johnson, Ted Johnston, John Grady
Sullivan, Walter Horowitz, Michael Stack, Lloyd Fuller, Michael Lewis,
Roger Fajman, Melinda Varian, Gerhard Postpischil, the late Ben
Schwarz, and many others gave very significant contributions and help
through the SHARE committee.  John Melcher is the chairman of the
GUIDE committee.  There were over 60 people at the GUIDE meetings, as
I understand.  G.U.I.D.E. Europe and SHARE Europe also helped.  Thank
you all for your diligence and persistence.

      Now that we've thanked some people, let's take a preliminary
look at what IBM says they've built into the new Assembler.  As of
this writing, I have access to the IBM announcement and a preliminary
copy of the General Information Manual for HLASM.  Please see Figure 1
for a summary of user requirements satisfied, taken from the IBM
announcement.


A SUMMARY OF WHAT YOU'LL GET.

      IBM has planned the new High Level Assembler, product number
5696-234, to span their mainframe environments:  MVS, VM, and VSE.
The enhancements are many, and can be divided into several different
categories.  These are:  Language Extensions, Assembly Listing
Enhancements, Usability Enhancements, Input-Output Enhancements, and
Performance Enhancements.  Most of these improvements were inspired
by, or were taken from, Greg Mushial's SLAC Mods.  Almost all of them
were brought to IBM's attention by user group requirements.

      The I/O extensions are perhaps simplest to explain, so I'll
start with them.  Greg Mushial had introduced an exit point for
intercepting the printout of the assembler listing.  IBM developers
extended the concept to include exit points for intercepting output
or input to all of the High Level Assembler's ddnames.  All input or
output files to the Assembler can now be accessed by user-written
customizations.

      Speaking of ddnames, IBM has introduced a new one to HLASM,
called SYSADATA, which was not in the SLAC Mods.  SYSADATA is a
Variable Blocked file containing many kinds of assembler data records
useful in debugging.  In summary, the SYSADATA file will contain
various record types, corresponding to:  the JOB and assembly
environment, the Assembly Options, the ESD records describing all
CSECTS and DSECTS, each source line, all source errors, all DC or DS
instructions, each machine instruction generated, each RLD record, each
Symbol record, each symbol's Cross Reference record, each Macro Cross
Reference record, the USING map, and all the Assembly Statistics.  Give
a round of applause to the IBM developers.

      Next, Assembly Listing enhancements include:  a USING map
showing all USING and DROP, PUSH and POP statements, the option of
showing all active USING statements at each page break, a MACRO cross
reference showing the source of all macros, a DSECT cross reference
mapping all DSECTs in the program, an improved symbol cross reference
showing changed fields and labels which are targets of a branch.
There is also a vastly improved assembler summary showing the source
dataset(s) and operating system level as well as performance
statistics.  You can globally turn off PRINT NOGEN with an option
setting.  And there is much more than that, to help in following
program logic and in debugging.  I haven't mentioned half of what's
there.

      Language extensions are too numerous to mention in this small
space.  I'll talk more about them next month.  In my opinion, the most
important extensions are the "Labeled USINGs" and "Dependent USINGs",
which allow the programmer to establish base-displacement
addressability without tying up an excessive number of registers.
These features had been a part of the SLAC Mods and were absorbed into
HLASM.  People who had the SLAC Mods and were afraid to use these
features because of portability doubts, will now be able to take
advantage of them with a clearer conscience.  Symbol names which are
not referenced externally, can be up to 63 characters long.  The
underscore is now accepted as an alphabetic character, to make the
assembler more compatible with higher level languages.

      Performance enhancements from the SLAC Mods, and perhaps others,
have been introduced into HLASM.  The assembler will report if there is
enough region space to support an in-core assembly, with no writing to
the SYSUT1 spill file.  Statistics to count reads and writes to the
SYSUT1 file are shown in the assembler summary report.  Some algorithms
for sequencing macro expansions have been reworked.  From what I can
surmise, it seems fair to say that HLASM performance is not usually
worse than that of its predecessor Assembler H Version 2, when
comparable options are run.

      I'll have to continue this discussion next time.  It is exciting
to finally see some IBM recognition that system-level coders should
get a hint of the service that high-level language coders are
receiving.  Now all they have to do is recognize that it's to their
advantage to cut down on OCO or eliminate it.  That'll be the day!
But a day has already come.  This is exactly what we said when we were
talking about IBM absorbing the SLAC Mods into the assembler.

      Keep the faith and keep up the pressure.  Try to make it to
SHARE, GUIDE, or your local user group, and good luck.  See you next
month.


  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


FIGURE 1.  REQUIREMENTS FROM VARIOUS USER GROUPS THAT WERE ACCEPTED
           FOR INCLUSION IN THE HIGH LEVEL ASSEMBLER.  (Quoted from
           IBM Announcement Number 292-244, dated May 5, 1992.)



  The following requirements from SHARE are:

 o    Incorporate the SLAC Mods into the assembler
 o    Memory management
 o    In-storage assembly
 o    CSECT/DSECT indicators for the location counter
 o    Active USINGs list
 o    Read and Write references in the symbol XREF
 o    Produce XREF of macros and copy code in assembly
 o    Produce XREF of DSECTS
 o    Terminal output enhancements
 o    Addressability of multiple instances of data area
 o    Multiple DSECTS mapped via one base register
 o    Provide SIZE option
 o    Flag duplicate and overlapping USING ranges
 o    Option to override PRINT NOGEN
 o    Treat underscore as alphabetic in symbols
 o    Allow lower case alphabetics in symbols
 o    Treat blank record as SPACE 1
 o    Provide user exit to control assembly listing
 o    Document AREAD parameters CLOCKB and CLOCKD
 o    Allow literals within EQU and expressions
 o    Allow EQUated symbols in SETA and SETB
 o    Implement "Line Counter" system variable symbol
 o    Relate symbols to owning DSECT/CSECT
 o    Implement "Current Sequence Field" system variable symbol.


  The following requirements from SHARE Europe are:

 o    Mixed case symbol namess
 o    Improve diagnostics for macro writers
 o    Control-block mapping.


  The following requirements from GUIDE are:

 o    Date and time of object modules
 o    Produce XREF of macros
 o    Support section type in system variables.


