                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          April 1993

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      Lakewood, New Jersey 08701


 Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer living
 in New Jersey.

COPYING TAPES CORRECTLY.


A WORD ON "BLINDNESS".

      There is one big goal in our side of the computer business, that
is, not to "fly blind".  Phrased more exactly, this means:  "It is best
not to perform an operation without being able to see exactly what you
are doing."  That's certainly true in medicine.  But in systems
programming, it's not always done.  There are many operations that,
unfortunately, we perform blind.

      A very typical example of this blindness is the case of checking
a disk pack to see if IPLTEXT was loaded properly on it.  If you loaded
the IPLTEXT yourself, you usually trust the zero return code from the
ICKDSF utility.  If someone else loaded the IPLTEXT, and it was done
some time ago, most of us don't make it a general practice to go to
track zero of the pack and take a look ourselves.  Most of us don't
bother to dump track zero with AMASPZAP to see what's there.  We just
try to IPL the pack, and we scratch our heads only if it doesn't work.

      To me this is badness.  It usually works out, but it has the
shortcoming that you are leaving yourself open to possible error.
Most people also don't bother to survey all of their packs to see
what IPLTEXT, if any, is loaded on all of them.  You might find that
some of your packs might have standalone FDR or standalone DFDSS or
standalone ICKDSF loaded on them, and you didn't know it.  Maybe these
standalone products are out of date, too.  You'd never know that if
you remained "blind" and didn't take a look.

      Today we're going to talk about techniques in copying and
constructing tapes.  Tapes are another area in which programmers are
tempted to "fly blind".  This doesn't have to be the case.  To remedy
that situation, I'll try to offer some suggestions on accomplishing
tasks in the area of tape manipulation.  Using the available tools we
recommend, you'll soon be able to perform tape tasks with less effort
and without "blindness".


TAPE VIEWING, AND TAPE COPYING.

      We'll start our talk with some mention of bypassing label
processing, otherwise known as "BLP privilege".  If you are going to
do what we would like to do, it sure helps to have BLP privilege!  I'd
bet that at least 97 percent of MVS systems programmers can get BLP
privilege for themselves if they asked for it.  After reading this
article, if you're tactful, you'll probably be able to demonstrate
that it's to the installation's advantage to grant BLP to you.  I
personally have had to ask for BLP privilege several times, and in
each case, I've received it.

      If you can't get BLP privilege after having tried, I know of
one set of tools you might be able to use.  On File 171 of the CBT
MVS Utilities Tape (distributed by NaSPA 414-423-2420 or by SPLA
305-284-6257) there is a TAPEMAP program and an MVS DITTO-type program
that were contributed semi-anonymously.  The person who contributed
these programs does not have access to BLP privilege, and he got
around that problem.  You are free to look at his code and see what he
did.  Of course, you can certainly make direct use of those very good
programs without knowing how he coded them.  It's nice to know that
even without BLP, a lot of tape investigation can be done.

      Back to the rest of us in BLP-land.  We are going to talk about
six relevant programs, all of which are on the above-mentioned CBT
MVS Tape.  They are:  TAPESCAN (File 102), TAPECOPY (File 174),
COPYFILE (File 316), TAPEMAP (versions on File 299 and File 181 for
now), COPYMODS (File 229), and CT (File 316).  Each of these programs
serves a somewhat different purpose.  It pays to know how to use all
of them, and to understand their differences.

      I'll summarize their features.  TAPESCAN dumps all tape labels
in their entirety, and dumps in HEX, the first 100 bytes of the first
nn blocks of each file.  (nn defaults to 6 blocks.)  TAPESCAN also
can copy tapes, and it has parameters for skipping some leading tape
marks or trailing tape marks.  This makes TAPESCAN a good tool for
copying DOS tapes or other tapes having a structure "unfriendly" to
normal MVS tape handling.  I used TAPESCAN as a debugging tool while
I was making enhancements to TAPEMAP several years ago.  TAPESCAN
shows you the relevant "byte-content" of a tape at the beginning of
each file.

      TAPECOPY from Aron Eisenpress of CUNY has more of an emphasis
on copying tapes than on mapping them.  TAPECOPY is similar to TAPESCAN
in that it can skip tape marks.  But TAPECOPY is programmed also, to
know about various error conditions that might occur while reading an
input tape.  TAPECOPY has provisions to ignore or retry a number of
different error conditions.  TAPECOPY can do one additional thing
which none of these other programs can do.  It can create a standard
labeled tape out of a non-labeled tape.  TAPECOPY manufactures the
tape labels from parameters which you supply in a parm field, and it
sandwiches the output tape's data files in between these newly created
labels.

      COPYFILE is designed to copy standard labeled (SL) tapes only.
COPYFILE will copy (in one job step) selected files from an input
tape, to successive files on an output tape.  See Figure 1, which
shows you some of the nice things that COPYFILE can do.  I personally
use COPYFILE often in my own work.  Very recently, I enhanced the
COPYFILE control cards to copy a range of successive files from the
input tape, but not to the end of the tape.  You can obtain that
enhancement to COPYFILE if you get Version 339 of the CBT Tape or
higher.

      TAPEMAP will not copy a tape, but will display its contents.
TAPEMAP's displays are not on a byte level, as are TAPESCAN's displays.
They are rather, detailed descriptions of the contents of all files.
TAPEMAP has two reports.  The first report is a summary of the block
structure and size of each file on the tape, both from LABEL information
and from SCAN information.  The second report of TAPEMAP displays the
detailed contents of each file, usually from a "member" point of view.
TAPEMAP recognizes many common MVS tape formats.  For example, if a
tape file was created by IEBCOPY, TAPEMAP's second report will show
all of the member names unloaded from the original pds.  TAPEMAP will
do similar revelations for IEBUPDTE format files, and will show PTF
or APAR numbers for SMPPTFIN format files, such as PTF files on a
PUT tape or CBPDO tape.  TAPEMAP recognizes about ten file formats
on a tape.  TAPEMAP will display the detailed contents of nearly all
of the compressed files on the CBT Tape itself.

      COPYMODS will copy an entire tape regardless of labels or not,
from end to end, until the first double tapemark.  In addition,
COPYMODS has the ability to create up to ten exact output copies of
one original input tape, if you have enough drives available.  I use
COPYMODS to duplicate all of my public domain tapes.  COPYMODS is
quick and automatic to use, and is almost foolproof, except for one
situation (which COPYFILE can be used to remedy).  That unlikely case
occurs when an empty pds is backed up using IEBCOPY to a standard
labeled (SL) tape.  This creates a header label followed immediately
by a trailer label, with no data file in-between.  COPYMODS thinks
that this is a double tape mark and erroneously stops at that point,
even though there are more files on the input tape.  Maybe one of you
out there can fix COPYMODS to correctly handle this situation.  Please
send your fix back to the contribution address on the CBT Tape, so we
can all benefit from your work.

      Finally, CT is a tape copying program that will recognize
multi-volume input tapes or single volume input tapes.  If the copying
was done from a single volume to a single volume, CT has the additional
option of verifying, byte for byte, if the copied tape was an accurate
reproduction of the original.  Thus, CT has some features that none of
the other programs has.


COPYING TAPES CORRECTLY.

      This collection of tools, as described above, gives you ample
means of correctly copying one tape to another.  Once you've done so,
you can accurately check if the new tape contains exactly what you
want it to have.  You can do away with "flying blind" entirely.

      One major reason for my saying all of this, is my peeve with
the common practice of using IEBGENER to copy tapes that have multiple
files on them.  IEBGENER copies only one file per job step.  You might
miss some, or all, of the later files on the input tape.  If a tape
has, say 50 files on it, using IEBGENER is extremely unwieldy.  You
would rather not code a 50-step job, when you can do it all in one
step, using the tools mentioned above.

      If you want to closely monitor what's been happening, you can
use the mapping properties of the programs mentioned above, especially
TAPEMAP and TAPESCAN.  Those programs take the guesswork completely out
of discovering the contents of almost any tape.  Especially using
TAPESCAN, MVS DITTO, or the DITTO-like program from File 171 of the
CBT Tape, you can "rescue" large parts of even badly damaged tapes,
and can save the undamaged files from them.


CONCLUSION.

      Tape work is a necessary part of our jobs.  Tape work can be
fun, and accurate, if you use the proper tools.  Multi-file tapes and
mildly damaged tapes do not have to be as much of a headache to copy
as they formerly were.  This collection of tools I've mentioned will
go a long way, even in the most "impoverished" of MVS shops, toward
improving the quality of your life as far as tape work is concerned.
You will not "fly blind" any more.

      In any case, I wish you good luck in all aspects of maintaining
your installations.  See you next month.


   *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


FIGURE 1.   ILLUSTRATION OF THE COPYFILE PROGRAM.


            The COPYFILE program allows the copying of selected files
            from a standard labeled (SL) input tape to a standard
            labeled output tape.  If some files already exist on the
            output tape, you can code control cards to preserve them,
            and you can write the new files immediately after the
            files you want to preserve.  COPYFILE does an OPEN TYPE=J
            to both tapes, and will only listen to the instructions
            you tell it, not to expiration information from the tape
            itself, or from a tape management system.  Therefore,
            COPYFILE is best used for your own personal tapes, or
            for special situations, not for normal production runs.
            Be aware that the ddname for the input file is called IN,
            but the ddname for the output file is called TAPELIN.
            Otherwise, the use of COPYFILE is very straightforward.


    COPYFILE Control Cards:

    1.  Copy files 3, 7, and 22 from the input tape to files 8, 9,
        and 10 of the output tape.

          3/8  7  22               (copy 3 to 8, 7 to 9, 22 to 10.)

    2.  Copy files 3, 7, and 22 to 8, 9, and 10 as before, but copy
        files 23 and all the rest of the input files to the output
        tape.  (23 to 11, 24 to 12, etc.)

          3/8  7  22  ALL

    3.  Copy files 3, 7, and 22 to 8, 9, and 10 as before, and copy
        all the rest of the input files, but only through file 50.
        (This is a new feature.  You need COPYFILE from CBT Tape
        Version 339 or later.  In the older version, you had to code
        all the specific file numbers between 23 and 50. )

          3/8  7  22  -50          (new COPYFILE version )

             or

          3/8  7  22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
          39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50

