                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         October 1995

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      Lakewood, New Jersey 08701


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer working
in New York City.


WORKING WITH TSO - PART I

      Most of us systems programmers do our work in interactive
terminal sessions.  I have yet to find any one of us in this age, who
still operates by running a succession of batch programs only.  If we
indeed worked without a terminal, we'd need to have a means of setting
up our JCL, and none of us seems to punch cards any more.  Thus, to my
knowledge, all of us MVS systems programmers have to work with TSO.
There are some shops who don't use ISPF under TSO, but use Wylbur or
Roscoe (or maybe even FSE) instead.  However, I feel fairly safe in
saying that for almost all cases, TSO, which is a part of the
operating system, is also a part of our working lives.

      For this discussion, I want to separate those parts of our
TSO work which specifically belong to TSO, from those other parts
which more rightfully belong to ISPF/PDF.  More specifically, I'd
like to begin with a talk about TSO command processors, and then
branch out from there.

      I find it hard to believe that there are MVS systems programmers
who don't know the difference between a TSO command processor, a CLIST,
a REXX exec, an ISPF dialog that is run from panels, and an ISPF dialog
that is driven by a program.  But I do get the feeling that the working
details and scope of each type of TSO utility are not sufficiently well
known by most people.  And I am certain that we all have plenty to
learn, concerning the awesome power available through utilities
belonging in each of these five categories.


SOME MISCELLANY.

      It is worth spending a short time discussing the distinction
between TSO and TSO/E.  TSO is the terminal monitor interface which
comes with the MVS operating system.  Base TSO has not been enhanced
much in many years, but has been brought to compatibility with the
rest of MVS, at least to the ESA Release 3 level.  Almost all real
enhancements to TSO have been added to the separately billed
replacement known as TSO/E.  The TSO-VTAM interface has been vastly
improved in TSO/E, as have many of the basically supplied TSO
commands, such as the ALLOCATE command.  I believe that from the ESA
Release 4 level, TSO/E is mandatory, and you can't order free base TSO
any more.  Our convention for the rest of this series, will be to use
the term TSO to refer to both base TSO and TSO/E, unless we need to
clearly make a distinction.

      Next, we'll make mention of TSO-in-Batch.  It is possible to
create a TSO-like environment in a background job by executing the
terminal monitor program IKJEFT01 in a batch job.  TSO commands are
entered through the SYSTSIN ddname, and output is obtained through
the SYSTSPRT ddname.  See Figure 1 for an example of a TSO-in-Batch
job which executes a TSO command.  We must carefully note at this
point, that in a batch job, a TSO command can only create printed
output if the PUTLINE output interface is used by the command, and
not if the simpler TPUT interface was used.  I've had the jolting
experience early in my career, that a TSO command did not print any
output at all when I ran it under TSO-in-Batch.  That command had
only used the TPUT macro for its output, and not PUTLINE.

      It is also appropriate to mention the free Automated Operations
package from File 403 of the CBT MVS Utilities Tape which is called
TSSO.  As part of its design, the MVS subsystem TSSO creates a TSO-like
environment, and it runs with almost the same JCL as a TSO-in-Batch
job.  The only difference is in the program being executed, and the
execution parms.  TSSO is a very interesting product and is worth your
time to study and learn from.  The purpose of TSSO, as conceived in the
original package by its author Bill Godfrey, was to enable an MVS
console operator to enter TSO commands at the console.  Bill's version
of TSSO is still available unchanged on the CBT Tape, on File 306.
TSSO was later expanded by Bellcore to include both Automated
Operations and Console Security capabilities, long before these
features became a part of the MVS scene.  As for the CBT MVS Tape, it
is free software, independently produced, and copies are orderable
from the NaSPA office.


TSO COMMAND PROCESSORS.

      A TSO Command Processor is a program which accepts input and
parameters from a terminal, and which performs actions.  When ENTER
is pressed and a command is executed at the terminal, its associated
TSO Command Processor program is attached by the Terminal Monitor
Program (TMP) that manages the TSO session.  Although a TSO command
which executes a TSO Command Processor looks different from a batch
program, it is in fact not much different at all.

      The range of power in a TSO command is enormous.  All of the
capability of an enabled system-level program can potentially be
brought to bear in a TSO Command Processor program.  Many "famous"
products that run under TSO are in fact TSO Command Processors, or are
started by Command Processors.  For example, ISPF itself is started as
a TSO Command Processor.  The enormously powerful PdsTools vendor
product, as well as its distant ancestor the PDS command from File 182
of the CBT MVS Tape are TSO Command Processors.  Each of these TSO
Command Processors can perform hundreds, if not thousands, of separate
functions.  IBM-supplied commands in SYS1.CMDLIB, such as TEST, LISTC,
LISTD, or the RACF commands, are all TSO Command Processors.  Simple
and complicated, TSO Command Processors are used by all of us, very
frequently during a day's work.

      At this point, I'd like to say a word about the special
execution of some of the programs designed to run under TSO.  From XA
2.2.0 onward, you can create a list of special programs in the
SYS1.PARMLIB member IKJTSOxx.  This list of programs has actually been
part of TSO from time immemorial, but it was formerly kept in a
different place.  There are four categories of such programs.  One is
a list of all APF Authorized TSO Command Processors which can be run.
Another is a list of all called programs (not TSO Command Processors)
which can be run APF Authorized under your TSO session.  A third list
contains authorized commands that can be run from non-authorized
programs under TSO.  And finally the fourth list contains TSO Command
Processors which cannot be run in the background, that is, they will
not be allowed to work under the TSO-in-Batch facility.

      In former releases of TSO, these lists were kept as tables in
four separate CSECTs.  The APF Authorized TSO commands were listed in
CSECT IKJEFTE2.  The called programs which could be run APF Authorized
under TSO were listed in CSECT IKJEFTE8.  The list of authorized
commands that could be run by non-authorized commands is in CSECT
IKJEFTAP.  And finally, the list of TSO Command Processors not allowed
to run in the background, is in CSECT IKJEFTNS.  Under very old
releases of TSO, these CSECTs were part of the main terminal monitor
program IKJEFT02.  Later (and currently) these CSECTs have been
separated out into their own load module called IKJTABLS.

      Normally, the active SYS1.PARMLIB member IKJTSOxx overrides the
load module IKJTABLS.  But if IKJTABLS is in an authorized STEPLIB in
your TSO session, IKJTABLS overrides the active PARMLIB member
IKJTSOxx.  This is a very useful fact for systems programmers who can
use their own LOGON procedures.  They can set up a private environment
completely separate from the public one.  For more help in this area,
see Files 185 and 186 of the CBT MVS Tape if you have a fairly recent
version.  Initialization of the effective set of program tables
normally takes place at LOGON time, but with the newest releases of
TSO/E, the globally effective IKJTSOxx PARMLIB member can be changed
using the TSO PARMLIB command.


STRUCTURE OF A TSO COMMAND PROCESSOR.

      Now we will talk about how a TSO Command Processor is
structured, at least in Assembler Language.  For detailed information,
the "TSO/E Customization" and "TSO/E Programming" manuals are very
helpful.  When a TSO command is entered at the terminal, the TSO
Terminal Monitor Program (or TMP) attaches the appropriate TSO command
processor program, whose load module has the same name as the command.
At this point, Register 1 is made to point to a control block called
the CPPL or Command Processor Parameter List.  The CPPL contains four
fullwords, each containing an address pointing to somewhere else.  In
order, the four addresses point to:  the Command Buffer, the UPT (User
Profile Table), the PSCB (Protected Step Control Block) and the ECT
(Environment Control Table).  These control blocks contain user-specific
information necessary for the Terminal Monitor Program to authorize
and process your request for action.

      Immediately after your TSO command processor gets control, it
must save the address of the CPPL, since Register 1 gets reused by
many system macros.  You usually save the pointer in another register
(using the LR - Load Register instruction) or in a fullword of storage
(using the ST - Store instruction) at the beginning of the program.
For a reentrant program, the "LR" method must be used initially,
because the GETMAIN macro which obtains dynamic storage needed by the
reentrant program reuses Register 1.

      Now we'll conclude with some information about the Command
Buffer and the other three TSO control blocks.  The Command Buffer
contains command input which was entered at the terminal, or in
the SYSTSIN ddname file if the command was run with TSO-in-Batch.
This input can be interrogated by the program.  To make life easier,
the actual buffer content is prefixed by two halfword binary
quantities.  The first quantity contains the total length of the data
in the buffer, including the 4 bytes of the prefixes.  The second
quantity is called the offset.  This is the displacement from the
beginning text byte of the buffer, to where the first parameter of
the command begins.  With such information, our program can contain
appropriate logic to evaluate the command entered.

      TSO also has a specially designed facility whose use is optional,
called the "TSO Parser" or IKJPARS.  Properly set up, IKJPARS can check
the syntax of any parameters in the command.  Setting up IKJPARS is a
bit involved, but once you've done it, you can usually copy much
"standard code" from one program to another.  Detailed information
about IKJPARS is found in the "TSO Programming" manual from IBM.

      I think the most important of the other three control blocks is
the PSCB, or Protected Step Control Block.  Settings in the PSCB
heavily determine how much power your session has.  One of our
previous columns (October 1994) was devoted to a detailed treatment of
the PSCB's power.  The PSCB contains the USERID and its length, the
session "attribute" flags, the logon time for the session in TOD Clock
format, and some pointers to other control blocks.  The PSCB is mapped
by macro IKJPSCB in SYS1.MACLIB, where you can read about what else it
contains.

      The UPT (User Profile Table) largely contains the information
which is controlled by the TSO PROFILE command.  The user's dataset
prefix, if it has been defined, is contained in the UPT, as well as
other user-specific and user-settable information.  The UPT is mapped
by macro IKJUPT from SYS1.MACLIB.

      The ECT (Environment Control Table) contains information that
mostly is related to what this TSO user is doing now.  One of the ECT
fields is the name of the last command entered.  The ECT has three
bytes of binary switches that tell you a lot about the current command
environment.  Among these are flags to indicate whether operands
(other than the command itself) exist in the command buffer, whether
various abnormal conditions have occurred, or whether this command is
running from a terminal or in the background (TSO-in-Batch).  The ECT
is mapped by macro IKJECT in SYS1.MACLIB, and from the macro, you can
read all about it.

      We have come to the end of our time for this issue, and we
hope to continue further on this same topic next time.  I trust that
this basic information will enhance your knowledge in dealing with
TSO.  Good luck.


  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 1.   Layout of a TSO-in-Batch Job.  Note that the actual TSO
            commands to be executed, are placed in a list in the
            SYSTSIN ddname.  Only TSO commands which write their
            output using the PUTLINE interface (and not the TPUT
            interface) will show output under TSO-in-Batch.  Standard
            IBM-supplied commands, such as the one shown, usually
            use the PUTLINE interface.




//TSOBATJB JOB (insert your job card information here)
//*  - - - -  Job to execute TSO-in-Batch (background)  - - - -  *//
//STEP01  EXEC PGM=IKJEFT01,REGION=4096K,DYNAMNBR=50
//STEPLIB  DD DISP=SHR,DSN=your.steplib.name
//SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
//SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
//SYSTERM  DD SYSOUT=*
//SYSTSIN  DD *
 LISTC LEV(SYS1) ALL
 LISTC LEV(SYS2) ALL
/*
//
