                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          October 1996

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      Lakewood, New Jersey 08701


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer working
in New York City.


GETTING STARTED WITH PUBLIC MVS SOFTWARE

      I have a lasting debt of gratitude to Arnold Casinghino, and to
all the other people who have contributed to the world of free MVS
software.  These folks have greatly boosted thousands of people's
careers by making handy tools and extensive software knowledge
available to them.  In more indirect ways, they have helped all the
users, and just about everyone else in MVS Systems Programming.
Indirectly, public programs distributed on the public software tapes
have indicated new directions for IBM software developers to follow.
Many "new" features of the MVS operating system have actually resulted
from public software modifications and enhancements to MVS, which
users later demanded from IBM.  People using the "public improvements"
to the system would pressure IBM through SHARE and GUIDE to include
these features into MVS itself.

      This month, I'd like to encourage more MVS systems programmers
to be helped directly rather than indirectly, by making their own use
of the many tools and learning aids which are available through free
MVS software.  Notwithstanding great pressure from the outside, IBM
"has its own mind", and they often will not incorporate features
gathered from public sources.  For example, IBM still does not plan to
incorporate a "dynamic exit loader" into JES2, to my knowledge.
Having such a tool is a great help to anyone who writes JES2 user
exits.  You don't have to recycle JES2 every time you want to change
or modify one of the exits.

      So, notwithstanding the improvements that IBM has incorporated,
the fact remains that the world of "MVS plus public software" still
looks a lot different than the world of "MVS without public software".
You, and your installation, have much to gain if you explore the world
of public software for yourselves.

      My own career boost started many years ago, when my MVS teacher
Jeff Broido flabbergasted me with a "super demonstration" of free
tools that he had installed.  Today, I hope we can open these doors
wider for many more of you, including those of you who are already
enjoying some of the great benefits of this beautiful world.


THE CBT MVS UTILITIES TAPE

      Where do you get started?  A logical place is the CBT MVS
Utilities Tape, a huge public collection of MVS software and materials
which is independently produced, and which can be ordered through
NaSPA.  Additionally, Version 404 of the CBT Tape has been included in
the third NaSPA CD-Rom.  I have always compared this tape to a huge toy
store.  Any "kid" can take any toy off the shelf.  The toy can be kept
and used, for no cost, provided that you make the effort to put it
together.  And that's all there is to it.

      Arnold Casinghino established the CBT (then called Connecticut
Bank and Trust) Tape back in 1975, when MVS was young.  At that time,
still in the MVT days, there were many "user forums" for public
discussion of software improvements.  However Arnie, with enormous
dedication, received contributions and took this tape through three
hundred and twenty-one versions over fifteen years, until changes at
his installation forced him to hand the reins over to someone else.
The impact of Arnie's efforts has been felt worldwide, and the MVS
operating system itself has been enormously improved through countless
suggestions that were born in the public forum that is this wonderful
tape.

      The present time is a "different era" from when the CBT Tape
was started.  However, even now, in an atmosphere which is being
pervaded by the extensive "vendorization and OCO-ization of MVS
software", a stultifying influence to the individual's creativity,
the CBT Tape stands as a bastion and a pillar to preserve and
disseminate MVS system knowledge.

      As of this writing, the CBT Tape is at approximately Version
408.  Once you obtain a copy of this tape, you are literally in a
"Toy Department Store".  It will be the function of the rest of this
article to show you how to browse through the store, and to pick out
all the toys that you want.


WHAT KIND OF TOYS YOU CAN HAVE

      Almost anyone who writes an improvement to the system, a tool
to look at or manipulate a system component, or anything that helps in
doing the daily system work, can contribute to the CBT Tape.  And they
have done so.  I will list some categories of items--by no means a
complete list, and you will have a better idea of what can be found.

      For example, you can find:  ISPF enhancements and edit macros,
useful CLISTs and REXX execs, system exit examples, tape tools (tape
copying programs and tape mapping programs), RACF utilities (see File
106 for an example), SMP tools (pre- and post-processors), core
browsers, disk browsers, disassemblers, system status reporting tools,
automated operations drivers, powerful dataset and load module
manipulation utilities, JES2 spool browsers (JES3 tools can be found on
the JES3 Share-Guide Tape from Alan Field 612-828-4979), and old
language compilers which still work on today's systems.  There are huge
collections of TSO commands and batch utilities.  There is also a
unique software ARCHIVER, which can store both your software source and
executable code on one disk or tape file.  There are utilities to
manage SYS1.BRODCAST on a user level, and much more.

      This list of goodies only scratches the surface.  There is a
special file on the CBT Tape, File 071, which contains documentation
files for many other tapes too, so you can figure out which other
public tapes you'd like to order.

      If you yourself have done some useful work, you too can
contribute.  File 001 (the documentation) of the CBT Tape contains
the address of the tape's editor, and contributions are always
welcome.


HOW DO YOU START EXPLORING THE CBT TAPE.

      File 001 of the CBT Tape now is over 30000 lines long.  Although
Arnie Casinghino no longer edits the tape, his influence in helping its
users still pervades the documentation.  There are many "sections" in
the documentation.  You should look at the ones which are most relevant
to you.  The beginning of File 001 now has a section called "What to do
with this tape first", which is specifically for new users of the tape.
This is a listing of some tape files which have wide application and
usefulness to the public.  If you are new to the tape, and you're just
exploring, you should begin here.

      Sometimes, you want to find coding examples of a particular
system exit, or you want to find the current source for a particular
program whose name you know.  There is a tape mapping program on File
299 of the CBT Tape (load module is on File 035) which will show every
PDS member name for every file on the tape.  If you run this program,
and copy the output to a disk dataset, you can look at the output and
scan for any particular member name you want to find.  You can also
copy the documentation file (File 001) to disk, and search it too,
in the same way.

      The CBT Tape is updated frequently, and you will profit
considerably by obtaining a new one every so often.  One of the sections
in the documentation is called the "Change Section".  Here, changes to
each new version of the tape are documented in detail.  You can check
the version number of your new tape, and you can follow all the changes
made since the previous tape you already had.  For example, suppose
your new tape is Version 408 and your previous tape was Version 397.
In the Change Section, all revisions and additions to files that have
been made, are summarized version by version, and you can check if
there is something new you'd like to see.  Change entries for all
versions from 398 to 408 can be read.  This amounts to about 280 lines
of reading material.

      The File Status Section of the documentation follows soon after
the Change Section.  In the File Status Section, a one-line summary for
each of the 472 files on the CBT Tape is given.  Each line contains a
short title describing the file's contents, the number of records in
the file (number of tape blocks for load libraries), the date the file
was last revised (this is accurate), the tape footage occupied by that
tape file (as though it were on a 6250 bpi reel), and the file format
(compressed, uncompressed, or IEBCOPY).

      Most of the source files are in a compressed IEBUPDTE-type
format, but the program which sequentializes the source PDS members
before compression is not actually IEBUPDTE, but LISTPDS (from File
316).  The LISTPDS program preserves ISPF statistics for the
individual members.  These are lost if IBM's IEBUPDTE program is used
to stow the members upon reloading from the tape.  However, the
program PDSLOAD (from File 093, load module on File 035), will restore
these ISPF statistics.  File 003 (JCL to load CBT Tape files to disk)
can be customized to either use IEBUPDTE or PDSLOAD.  IEBUPDTE is the
default, but it is recommended that users install and use PDSLOAD, to
keep the ISPF statistics for the file members.  Any tape file which
contains ISPF statistics in this format, is marked in the File Status
Section with an "S" next to the record count.

      The general layout of the CBT Tape is as follows:  Files 001 thru
005 are in fixed blocked 80-byte uncompressed format with blocksize of
32720.  My practice is to copy these to PDS members with IEBGENER.
File 001 is detailed documentation.  File 002 is assembler source for
the Compression-Decompression program called CBT973 which is used to
decompress most of the tape files.  File 003 is model JCL to load the
individual tape files to disk.  File 004 will probably not be used.
It is JCL if the tape had to be broken into two, in a special format
that nobody uses now.  File 005 is new.  This is from George Shedlock
and is a VM REXX exec to load the CBT Tape files onto a VM system.  It
seems that VM'ers also can use quite a bit of the material from the CBT
Tape.  The rest of the files are the data files, described in the
"Documentation Section" which details the contents of all these tape
files individually.


SUGGESTIONS

      Approaching the CBT Tape all depends on what you want to do.  If
you have a specific thing you're looking for, you might try searching
the documentation for name strings, or searching the TAPEMAP of the
tape as I mentioned before.  If you're new, look at the beginning of
the tape documentation, and savor slowly what you are reading.  If you
are getting a new tape after having used an older one, go to the
Change Section to see files which have changed since your last version,
and go to the File Section to look at the latest dates, for accurate
information about which files were changed recently.

      I have an allocated PDS to which I copy the new documentation
and the sample JCL for unloading files.  I personally make a copy of
this JCL and edit it to conform to my installation standards.  I also
customize it for loading a few selected files at a time.  The supplied
JCL is designed for loading all the files from the tape onto disk--
several hundred files in several more hundred execution steps.  There
are too many EXEC cards generated in the JCL for the system to handle,
so the total JCL deck has been broken into five jobs.  Various files
are in different formats, so there are different PROCs, one each for
every file format on the tape.  All of these procs are repeated five
times in the supplied JCL stream.  When customizing, you need only
make one job with one copy of these PROCs.  When loading a particular
file to disk, you then need only copy the appropriate PROC execution
step from the sample JCL to your customized JCL.

      For example, UPDATEO is one of the more frequently used PROCs.
After customizing your JCL, if you want to load only FIle 316 to disk,
you need only copy the one line of JCL from the supplied deck, namely:

//STEP316  EXEC UPDATEO,LAB=316

and this will correctly load the file that you want.

(Editor, the // must be at the beginning of a column.)

      Another suggestion:  You know how some people read mail order
catalogs for fun.  Print a full copy of the CBT Documentation File
and put it into a binder.  If you're fortunate enough to have a
printer which will rotate the print 90 degrees so it looks like a
book, that's even better.  Now you have a "CBT Tape" toy store
catalog all your own, and you can study it even more than the people
who read the Sears Catalog, or any other catalog they like.  This is
the best way to explore the real world of wonderful free MVS software,
and to gather tons of information about various system components.  I
have done so, and I can talk from experience.  You can do the same.

      Finally, that's not the end of CBT Tape "madness for personal
gain".  There is now a "CBT Overflow Tape" in the same format as the
regular CBT Tape, which contains a lot of older code from various
sources that were not easily accessible.  The CBT Overflow Tape can be
ordered from the NaSPA office also, although it too is independently
produced.

      At this point, when we're about to end, I must be apologetic
for not mentioning many "real hints and specific tips for problems"
this month.  However, if you obtain the CBT Tape materials (tape or
CD-Rom) and do some exploring, you'll come across more hints and
tips than you know what to do with.  And it is highly possible that
some old utility which your company has been using for years, can be
upgraded to a modern and enhanced version.  At least, you can find
source code for it.  Public tape exploration in general, and CBT
Tape exploration in particular, is a profitable business.  Try it.
You'll like it.  See you next month.


