                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                           May 1996

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      Lakewood, New Jersey 08701


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer working
in New York City.


EYES - PART 1

      I am of the opinion that Systems Programmers should learn about
the system from the system itself.  Documentation can be extremely
helpful for general knowledge and diagnosis, but the bottom line is
always to find out which bytes the system is "looking at".  In my old
days as an application programmer, I always wanted to look at the
exact image of the actual data that my program was looking at.  With
an application program, you can't accurately diagnose a problem unless
you see the data that the program was trying to read.  I think the
principle is the same with the system itself, even though the
operating system is far more complicated.

      In dealing with the operating system, why don't people think this
way?   Because they don't have the "eyes", or tools to see what is
actually going on, and therefore they have to resort to guessing and
documentation.  You may ask, what would most people do if they got the
eyes?  Probably, the smarter ones would learn to use them sooner, while
others would take longer in doing so.  Some might never learn.

      It helps if the eyes, or tools, are manufactured by IBM.  Often,
when an improvement is made to ISPF, many people eventually learn to
use it.  I've noticed this from looking over other people's shoulders
while they were working.  Vendor tools, which are less standard, will
acquire their following.  However, it might take longer for a high
percentage of the programmers to start using their features heavily.
If an installation acquires a diagnosis tool, often they will send its
potential users to a class.  Nowadays, with tight budgets, classes are
getting rarer, and the exploitation of a vendor's tool might take a
long time, or might never occur.

      What if the eyes are free?  Last time, we discussed some of the
management aspects of this.  However, each systems programmer can
acquire and learn to use such available tools.  It just takes ambition.

      Today, we will look at examples of some free tools we can use as
eyes to see the operating system.  These tools can be used separately,
in conjunction with each other, or together with vendor tools you have.
Our aim is to encourage you in developing a growth to your "visual
technique" so you can see what is going on, instead of having to guess.


TYPES OF EYES.

      We might say generally that any tool which displays some function
of the operating system to us, might properly be called an "eye" to the
system.  However, we need many types of "eyes".  A performance monitor,
which exhibits many system functions, and the current status of jobs or
tasks, is one type of eye.  A "core browser" or storage browser, is
another type of eye.  A JES2 or JES3 spool browser is a third type.
A program such as "Fullscreen ZAP", which can examine the entire content
of a disk pack, is a fourth type.  A multi-purpose tool-box to examine
files or data, is a fifth type.  An EDP Auditor's tool is a sixth type.
And there are other types of eyes in addition to these.

      The usual work we need to do, in diagnosing some problem or in
evaluating performance, generally involves the skilful use of several
types of eyes in succession.  My friend Rick Fochtman phrased it very
well.  He told me:  "The problem is knowing which eyes to select."
We'll start addressing this issue right now.

      To begin, I do not wish to restrict our discussion to free tools,
vendor tools, or IBM tools only.  Any tool you have, if you learn how
to use its features, will help you see better.  I often write about
free tools, because they are available to everyone who tries to get
them, and one need not worry about such "trivialities" as budgets.  I
want everyone who reads this column to benefit from it, so it is
necessary to use examples from tools which everybody can potentially
obtain for themselves.  However, everything we say applies equally to
vendor or IBM tools of equivalent function.  Most of the free tools are
found on the CBT MVS Utilities Tape, which can be ordered through NaSPA,
and to which I will often refer.

      A good pair of eyes for beginning our discussion, is the SHOWMVS
TSO command from Gilbert Saint-flour, which can be found on File 183 of
the CBT MVS Tape.  SHOWMVS has many of the features of a performance
monitor, in that it will display dozens of aspects of the current state
of your system.  Last IPL date and time, your SYSRES and installed
software release levels, CPUs and available storage, your IODF and
SMS setups, all online peripheral devices, your available and active
SMF datasets, and many many other things, are quickly available to be
viewed.  SHOWMVS gives you a very quick and comprehensive overview of
many aspects of your system.  Commercial performance monitors will show
you many of the same types of things that SHOWMVS will, and it is not
our place here to evaluate which is better.  I only want to say that if
you need an overview of how your system is set up, and what it is doing,
something like SHOWMVS is a good place to start.

      If you want to browse things to look at them, the REVIEW command
from File 134 of the CBT Tape is very helpful.  REVIEW uses BSAM, so it
can be used to look at keyed files, such as SYS1.BRODCAST.  Among many
other capabilities, REVIEW can browse VSAM files, very large sequential
files, and it can interpret the records in SMF and LOGREC datasets.
REVIEW is currently maintained by Greg Price of Melbourne, Australia.
Another good browsing tool is the BR command (also from Gilbert
Saint-flour), which extends the capabilities of ISPF Browse to be able
to look at VSAM files and other weirder types of datasets.  I think
that REVIEW can do more than BR, but in many cases, the familiarity of
the ISPF BRIF (Browse) service used by the BR command, such as its
vertical HEX display, will come in handy.  I use both of them.

      Now let's put the two types of eyes, SHOWMVS and REVIEW, together
to solve a relatively simple problem (that for most people is rather
difficult).  Somebody deleted a dataset in the last hour, and we want
to find out who did it.

      How do we start?  First, we can understand that this type of
information is kept in SMF records, and SMF records are located either
in the SYS1.MANx datasets, or on backup tapes.  To tell if the needed
SMF records are still in an active SYS1.MANx dataset, we issue TSO
SHOWMVS from any ISPF command line, and we are treated to an ISPF
browse of much system information.  After scrolling down about 40 lines
or so, there is the SMF information, and the active and not-yet backed
up SYS1.MANx datasets will be very obviously displayed.

      The REVIEW command can look at all of this information, either
on disk or on tape, but to keep things simple, lets say that SHOWMVS
tells us that SYS1.MAN2 is the active SMF dataset right now, and that
it contains quite a bit of data.  We can now issue the command TSO
REVIEW 'SYS1.MAN2', and we will be given a glance at the raw SMF data
in SYS1.MAN2.  To format the data, we need only enter a REVIEW
subcommand, SMF, which will interpret all of the SMF records and their
timestamps.  Repeated invocation of the SMF subcommand toggles the
interpretation of the SMF records on and off.  Now, we have several
FIND commands at our disposal.  If we enter, FIND our.dataset.name ALL,
we'll get a display of all the SMF records in the dataset that contain
our dataset's name.  We then have to only look for the last Type 15
record for that dataset, together with the userid and the timestamp, to
figure out who deleted the dataset, and when it was done.


MORE EXAMPLES.

      We just saw how the careful use of several types of eyes, can
neatly solve a somewhat tricky problem in a routine way.  If you set
your system of eyes up properly, you can tackle many difficult system
problems equally well, and very routinely.

      Now let's look at another problem which is very different.
A user can't get job output back.  The job has completed, and has flown
through the network to "we know not where".  The user's JCL has an
interesting mixture of /*ROUTE PRINT and OUTPUT cards specifying
destinations.  The whole picture is very confusing to us, and it is our
job to untangle it.  We want to make sure that this user, and all the
other users connected with the job, get their proper job output.

      Our problem is made difficult by the fact that as soon as the
user's job completes, it starts flying through the network nodes, and
it is gone from our spool before we can get a proper look at it.  The
pain-in-the-neck solution is to start looking at SYSLOGs from the
various systems, and tracing the job as it has flown.  This is a very
difficult and time-consuming task at its best.  However, there is a
better way, which involves a certain kind of eye.

      I strongly recommend that every systems programmer in a JES2 shop
install the appropriate version of the QUEUE command.  QUEUE is a TSO
command which displays JES2 spool data of many kinds.  Even though your
shop may have commercial spool browsing products such as SDSF or IOF,
I think you would profit by having an available copy of QUEUE, in
addition to these.  Versions of QUEUE are available on the CBT Tape for
JES2 versions 1.3.6 through Version 5.2.  These, and even earlier
versions, can also be found on the JES2 SHARE Tape obtainable from Jack
Schudel at 904-392-4601.  A parallel product called SDF for all recent
versions of JES3, can be found on the JES3 SHARE/GUIDE Tape, obtainable
from Alan Field at 612-828-4979.

      QUEUE can be used to solve our job-in-the-network problem.
Get a copy of the user's JCL and add TYPRUN=HOLD to the JOB card.
One might question the use of TYPRUN=HOLD, because it will keep the
job, unexecuted, in our own spool.  But this is what we want.  With
the user's job HELD, but ready to go, we can use QUEUE to display the
JES2 JCT control block for this job, while it is being held in our
system.  The JCT will show all the routing destinations in various
fields, and will enable us to leisurely figure out where the job's
output will eventually wind up.  SDSF doesn't display JES2 control
blocks.  IOF does.  It doesn't really matter which eyes you use.  I
just wrote about QUEUE because it is free and available to everyone.

      Let's conclude this month's discussion with one more example.  I
recently obtained a new copy of SHOWMVS from Gilbert Saint-flour and
assembled it (with old JCL).  The resulting load module, before
displaying anything, went down with various system abends, such as
S0C1, S0C2, and S0C4.  My instinct pointed to an unresolved external
reference, which was confirmed by mapping the SHOWMVS load module with
a mapping tool.  This is another kind of eye.  IBM's AMBLIST could have
done the job, but I used the PDSTOOLS vendor product (from Serena in
Burlingame, California) with its MAP subcommand, directed at the
module.  A more primitive version of this product, called PDS, which is
on the CBT Tape (File 182), could also have done this particular job,
and revealed the unresolved external reference to the missing
sub-program.  Once I saw that the sub-program was missing, I
re-examined Gilbert's source code.  It turned out that he had added
another CSECT, and there was an END card between the first CSECT and
the second.  In my assembly JCL, the BATCH option had been turned off,
so that the assembly ended after the first END card, not including the
new CSECT.  I turned the BATCH option on in the assembly, assembled
both CSECTs, included the sub-program, and resolved the external
reference.  The resulting load module has given me no problems.

      Space has come to an end, and today's session must close, but
I hope to continue on this subject of eyes, next time.  My personal
systems programming motto is to learn as much about the system, from
the system itself.  To do so, you need to look, and to look, you must
learn to use your eyes.  Good luck and good searching.



