                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         November 1996

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      Lakewood, New Jersey 08701


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer working
in New York City.


ALTERNATIVES AND DATASET RECOVERY

      Once upon a time in my career, I used to sell shoes.  Back then,
among my clientele, it was common to hear the expression:  "Sometimes
the shoemaker goes barefoot."  Recently, a similar thing happened at
my shop.

      In our place, we have a person who is an expert at DASD and SMS
administration.  This person was in the middle of setting up SMS on
one of our LPARs which didn't use SMS, and he put in many hours of
work figuring out all the rules that would be needed.  These were all
placed in a partitioned dataset he had, on his own disk pack.  One
day, he came to me very disturbed; he had accidentally deleted this
pds.  I asked him if there was any full-pack backup, and he said
no--his private pack was not in the shop's backup schedule.  I asked
him if he HBACKed the pds, and he told me that most of his work was
done from the side of the shop that is not running HSM.  In short, he
was stuck.  Our expert shoemaker was indeed, temporarily barefoot.

      What did he come to me for?  He wanted to see if I could
"un-delete" his PDS.  I told him I would try.

      As you undoubtedly know, un-deleting a PDS is highly non-trivial
in the MVS system.  The VTOC and index entries get deleted, although
(usually) the data is still there.  Un-deleting a dataset involves
creating a new VTOC entry, with the correct dataset attributes, that
points to the correct data, including all its previous extents.  I have
some personal experience doing this, and have written about the subject
before.  ("A VTOC Adventure - Part 3" in this column, June 1995.)  But
the MVS operating system and DASD structures have changed subtly since
then, as we shall see.  This process is not as straightforward as it
once was.

      What I had to do, was to un-index the disk pack using ICKDSF
with its OSVTOC command.  Then I had to find the data on the disk
pack.  I looked for available extents with a track mapping tool
(any "MAPDISK" type utility will do - I used IEHMAP from File 083
of the CBT MVS Utilities Tape, which can be ordered through NaSPA).
Then I had to verify that the deleted data was what I wanted to
restore, so I had to look at it, using the Fullscreen Zap TSO command
from File 134 of the CBT Tape, in FULLVOL mode, using ZAP's absolute
CCHHR display, and looking at record 1 from the available extents
shown by IEHMAP.  I had to make sure I had the correct deleted data.

      Then I used the free Fullscreen ZAP command again to look at the
VTOC.  First, I had to find an unused (Format 0) VTOC entry, and then
I had to create from it, a Format 1 VTOC entry which pointed to the
correct data, with dataset attributes that were like the ones the
original dataset had.  This was by means of direct zapping of the
blank VTOC entry, to create a Format 1 entry to point to the deleted
data.  I have written this up in my June 1995 column (all of my
previous columns can be found on File 120 of the CBT Tape), but the
procedure is quite delicate, because all of the VTOC fields have to be
right.  After I got done with the VTOC entry, all the member data was
still there, since the directory was still in place.  I thought I was
just about finished.  All that needed to be done at this point, was to
copy all the members from this reconstructed pds into a "healthier"
pds which was created the regular way.  It looked as if we were home
free.

      That's where we were in for a shock.  It seemed that with our
system configuration, IEBCOPY had some kind of bug, and it deleted all
the pds members before they could be copied out.  I now had to restore
all the deleted pds members, by recreating directory entries for them.

      There are several ways to restore deleted pds members without a
tremendous amount of effort.  See the PDSGAS program from File 316 of
the CBT Tape, or the RESTORE subcommand of the PDS command processor
from File 182 of the CBT Tape, or the FIXPDS utility from File 036 of
the CBT Tape.  I went and restored all the pds members, using names
$$000001, $$000002, etc. with this sort of tool.  After that was all
done, I turned the restored pds back over to my colleague, so he could
copy the members to another pds.

      Again IEBCOPY failed.  Both my colleague and I tried it several
times, and IEBCOPY wiped out all the members, so I had to keep
restoring them again.  I needed another way to save the members and
copy them out, so my colleague's work didn't have to be duplicated.

      Fortunately, we have alternatives.  It seems that IEBCOPY opens
its input dataset for INOUT, and therein lies the problem.  If we could
find a copying utility which just opens the input dataset for INPUT
and straightforwardly copies the members, we would be home free.  There
are actually many alternatives we could try.  First, we might try to
offload the members of the pds, in IEBUPDTE format, to a sequential
dataset, and then reload them into a new partitioned dataset.  If IBM's
IEBUPDTE would'nt work, we could try the LISTPDS program (from File 316
of the CBT Tape) which does a similar job.  Or we could try the OFFLOAD
program from File 093 of the CBT Tape.  Or we could use the REVIEW TSO
command from File 134 of the CBT Tape.  With REVIEW, you allocate a
sequential output dataset to the SYSUT2 ddname.  Then you REVIEW the
partitioned dataset and get a directory listing for it.  Finally, in
the eight-byte input field at the top of REVIEW's directory screen, you
enter the command, "=OFFLOAD", and REVIEW will write all the members in
IEBUPDTE format, to the sequential dataset.  Still another alternative
would be to use the new COPY facility in later versions of the REVIEW
command.  That facility allows you to COPY anything you are browsing on
a REVIEW screen, into another dataset that has been previously
allocated to the SYSUT2 ddname.

      What I actually did, was to use an alternative member-copying
utility in a vendor product, which EXCP'ed the input member data on
the read, and BSAM'ed it out to an output pds as a new member.  This
worked fine, because only the member data was read, and the input
dataset as a whole was not mucked with.  The actual tool was the DUP
subcommand of the PDSTOOLS (now called STARTOOL) product from Serena
in Burlingame, California.  Other alternatives could surely work also.
You just have to think, using your system knowledge, your tool
repertoire, and your creativity.  But my main point with this story,
is that you should acquire a large collection of alternatives.  As a
result of all my experiences, I never say that if there is one tool to
do a job, I don't need another.  I always look for alternative tools
to do the same job.  When one tool doesn't work, another tool just
might.


RECOVERING DATA FROM DAMAGED DATASETS.

      Sometimes, hopefully rarely, one comes across a situation where
a disk dataset is damaged in one or several places, but you need the
data.  It would be extremely helpful in such a case, to save whatever
good data you can.  Again, my approach to the subject is:  one tool is
good to have, two tools are better to have, and the more tools, the
merrier.  Many MVS shops have bought IBM's MVS DITTO product, which is
quite good in such a case.  You can use DITTO to copy off a bunch of
records until just before the I/O error in the file.  Then you can use
DITTO to skip the bad area, and copy off more good records.  And so on,
until you have saved as many good data records as you could.

      There is another way, however, which is a batch program that is
much quicker.  This is a program called RECOVER.  RECOVER originally
came from the University of Waterloo in Canada.  Currently, RECOVER is
on the CBT Tape in File 455, as part of Paul Moinil's excellent and
large collection of system programmer tools, taken from "everywhere".
Paul Moinil is a highly skilled systems programmer who works in Ispra,
Italy, and who has compiled a large collection of extremely useful
tools, many of which he has modified.  RECOVER's function is to
automate the process of sequential dataset recovery, which we briefly
described above.  RECOVER works by copying the damaged dataset, but
when it comes to an I/O error, it skips to a pre-specified good area
which follows, and then copies further.

      RECOVER works something like IEBGENER, but for damaged datasets.
The SYSUT1 ddname points to the input, the damaged dataset.  SYSUT2
points to an output dataset, to which RECOVER will copy records from
the input dataset, according to instructions specified by the PARM
field.  DCB information from the input dataset is always copied to
the output dataset, so as to avoid additional problems.

      The parms work as follows:  There are four keywords, COUNT,
START, POINT, and WRITE.  These can optionally be abbreviated to C, S,
P, and W respectively.  COUNT=N specifies the number of I/O errors or
end-of-files the program is to accept (default=1).  START=XXXXXXXX
specifies the relative track and record beyond the start of the
dataset where the recovery is to start.  The value given is in TTRZ
format in hex (default=00000000, which is the very beginning of the
dataset).  If the input dataset is a pds, START=00000000 will copy the
directory as part of the output dataset with DCB attributes of the
data.  Of course, the directory will be useless as a directory, but
you can edit it out later.  POINT specifies the type of skipping that
is to be done if the program encounters bad data.  Valid values are T,
R, or Z, corresponding with TTRZ format.  In other words, do you want
to skip to the next track (POINT=T) or the next block on that track,
(POINT=R) or the next block in the dataset, in whatever track or
extent it falls (POINT=Z)?  Default is POINT=Z.  My opinion is that
POINT=Z is probably safest.  Finally, the WRITE keyword specifies
whether you want to write a partially filled input buffer out to the
output dataset.  The idea is:  You never know when you'll encounter an
I/O error.  At the time, you'll probably have a partially filled input
buffer.  Do you want to write these records to the output dataset, or
do you want to discard them?  WRITE=Y tells RECOVER to write out
partially filled buffers at the time of I/O errors.  WRITE=N tells the
program to discard the records in the partially filled buffer
(default=N).

      So now you see that RECOVER, if you make the effort to set it up,
can save you oodles of time, on occasion.  Instead of playing games
with DITTO for an hour or more, you can set up this batch job, and see
what sort of recovery data it gives you.  If the recovery data is
sufficient, then fine.  Otherwise, you can play with RECOVER's parms,
and see if another run will give you more satisfactory results.

      There is one more alternative I'd like to suggest, as space will
allow.  This our old favorite browsing tool, the TSO command called
REVIEW from File 134 of the CBT Tape.  More recent versions of REVIEW
have the capability of copying the data that you are browsing.  The
output dataset is pointed to by previously allocating the SYSUT2 ddname
to it, under your TSO session.  COPY and ADD subcommands of REVIEW
will copy data to the output dataset or append additional data to it.
You can control how much data you want to COPY or ADD with additional
keywords.  At this point, it is apparent that REVIEW can be used for
data recovery purposes, in much the same way as we described for DITTO,
except that with REVIEW, you see the data in a more natural format.

      This month, I've made several points:  First, the more ways you
can do a job, the safer you are, in case one of them won't work.
Second, some tools are quicker than others which do the same job.  A
quicker utility will save you valuable time in a pinch.  Third, the CBT
MVS Utilities Tape contains many collections of such tools to explore.
Making an investment in time, with the CBT Tape and other software tool
sources, including your shop's vendor products, will expand your skill
repertoire, and you'll gain the time back in the long run.

      Good luck in all your endeavors, and I hope to see you again
next month.

