                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         December 1997

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.


REMEMBERING TSSO

      Systems programming professionals have long been known for
creating clever tools and programs.  Historically, this was encouraged
by our environment, as manufactured and developed by IBM.  MVS has
always been an extremely robust operating system, with many parts and
facilities.  However, IBM seems to concentrate its programming efforts
mostly on developing the system facilities themselves, leaving the
utilities and fine touches mostly to others, and to later development.

      I'll explain.  When IBM would release a level of the operating
system, they would ship some raw tools for handling the system parts
along with it.  For example, to change an arbitrary disk file, IBM
gave us the AMASPZAP (superzap) program, which works.  To create a
text file, IBM (in the past) shipped the EDIT TSO command, and later,
they created the easier-to-use SPF and ISPF packages.  No one of us
can argue that AMASPZAP, EDIT or the ISPF editor cannot do its basic
job.  However, most of us, who are familiar with some of the non-IBM
packages, will insist that the pure IBM-supplied tools do not provide
the best ways of doing the job.  IBM, it seems, concentrates its best
efforts in providing the operating system and foundation structures.
The more specialized and user-friendly tools and utilities for
manipulating these structures are usually left for others to develop.

      By saying this, I don't mean to slight the enormous recent
efforts of some of the IBM programming groups, notably the ISPF
development group, and others, in improving their tools to make our
lives easier.  I just mean to point out the historical directions in
our field.  IBM usually would concentrate on developing a robust
system first, and they'd usually try to improve the utilities later,
or leave their improvement to others.

      My real point is, that anyone who is familiar with the free
UCLA Fullscreen ZAP TSO command, as improved by Greg Price, will never
want to use AMASPZAP to change a disk file, except in certain cases,
for example, when TSO is down.  Fullscreen ZAP is much easier to use:
You see what you are doing on a full TSO screen.  There is a FIND
subcommand to locate data that needs changing.  There are all kinds of
"helpers" such as AND, OR, XOR, and setting an entire record to a
given value.  And you can always see the raw structure of the data
(block size), and where the data is, on which cylinder and which
track.  You can easily find deleted disk data, and even change that.
AMASPZAP, although quite capable, is far harder and more unfriendly
to use, as everyone knows.

      Another thing to point out, is that IBM's later improvements
often come because of suggestions from user groups, such as SHARE and
GUIDE.  The people who go to SHARE and GUIDE often get the ideas to
tell IBM, from the user-developed tools and utilities which have
appeared on the CBT MVS Utilities Tape, and in other sources of free
code.  User-developed code is probably the greatest source of IBM
direction, for improvements to their utilities.  That also includes
IBM internally developed user-written code, which IBM programmers
write for their own use, and not for general release.

      This takes us to our current topic, which covers several
fields.  We are going to talk about a product called TSSO, which can
do several different things, depending on which version you are
using.  IBM has partially caught up with, or surpassed, some of TSSO's
functionality.  But IBM, to my knowledge, has not even addressed
TSSO's original function.  That's why I feel it's proper to talk about
TSSO here.


WHAT IS TSSO?

      TSSO, short for Time Sharing Subsystem Option, is a package of
programs, several versions of which appear on the CBT MVS Utilities
Tape.  The primary function of TSSO is to allow the execution of TSO
commands at an MVS Operator console, through the creation of a
TSO-like environment that is driven from console commands, and creates
responses as console messages.  The later versions of TSSO have other
important functions in addition to this.  TSSO is also an MVS
subsystem, which can either operate under JES2 or JES3, or without
JES.  TSSO operating without JES, is a powerful system recovery
tool, because one can do dataset renames, string scans and replaces,
and IEBCOPY executions, without JES2 (or JES3) being up.

      As I've said many times in previous columns, the CBT Tape is an
independently produced huge collection of free System Programmer
goodies, that can be ordered through the NaSPA office.  All materials
on the CBT Tape can be freely copied and used by anyone, although a
few of them are "owned" and have copyright notices printed in them.
The original version of TSSO, written by Bill Godfrey, is on File 306
of the CBT Tape.  Bill Godfrey's TSSO contains only the basic TSSO
function of allowing TSO commands to be executed at an operator
console.

      TSSO takes the TSO terminal environment, and establishes an
equivalent environment at the operator's console.  In other words,
with TSSO, the console operator has access to TSO commands and
CLISTs.  Of course, there has to be one significant limitation.  TSO
is a full screen environment.  That being the case, there are two
alternatives in the way messages can be sent to the screen of the TSO
user.  Messages can be sent to the screen either one line at a time,
or else they can be sent in one burst, filling the screen all at once.
The second way is called a full screen TPUT.  The operator console is
a line-mode environment, with console messages that come, one line at
a time.  One limitation of TSSO is now clear:  Any TSO commands which
put out terminal output one line at a time, are OK.  TSO commands
which issue a full screen TPUT, filling the screen all at once, are
not OK.  So you have to be intelligent under TSSO, deciding which TSO
commands you can issue at the console.

      There is one further fact to note.  TSO has two methods of
issuing line output to a screen.  One of these is via the TPUT TGET
interface, and the other is by the PUTLINE, GETLINE, PUTGET interface.
TPUT is easier to code in a program, but the output cannot be sent
to print under TSO-in-batch (see my October 1997 column).  PUTLINE
is quite difficult to initially set up in a program, but the PUTLINE
terminal output can be sent to print in a TSO-in-batch job.  This
same situation occurs in the TSSO console environment.  Messages
for a TSO user that were written using PUTLINE, appear at the console
as replies to a command.  Messages written using TPUT, do not appear.
However, this does not mean that a TSO command which uses TPUT
messaging, is ineffective.  It may still do its job.  For example,
IBM's RENAME TSO command does not use PUTLINE replies.  However,
under TSSO, the RENAME command will definitely do its job, to rename a
dataset or a pds member.

      TSSO has one additional advantage--it is also an MVS subsystem.
As such, TSSO may be started using SUB=MSTR, and in that case, it will
come up without JES.  The TSO commands can then be executed without
JES2 (or JES3) being up.  TSSO thus becomes a system recovery tool,
of great usefulness.

      TSSO can also be brought up under JES as well, and you can
START TSSO,SUB=JES2 or JES3.  If TSSO is brought up under JES, then
the TSO SUBMIT and OUTPUT commands will work.  If TSSO is started
with SUB=MSTR, these commands, which need JES, will not work, but
all the other line-mode TSO commands which don't need JES, will work
quite well.  I have used TSSO together with the PDS command processor
(CBT Tape File 182 or 295) which invokes IEBCOPY using its COPY
subcommand, and have copied entire datasets and members when JES2
was down.  TSSO, operating without JES2, can save your shop in a
rough situation, by allowing you to correct errors in your system
initialization datasets.  Through the PDS command, you can even add
more directory blocks to the SYS1.PARMLIB or SYS1.PROCLIB datasets,
when JES is down.  A sample PDS subcommand to do this would be:
FIXPDS EXPANDDIR(nn), where nn is the number of directory blocks
you want to add, and PDS, through TSSO, is pointed to SYS1.PARMLIB
or SYS1.PROCLIB.


TSSO AS A TOOL FOR AUTOMATED OPERATIONS

      Back in 1985 and 1986, Marc Schare at Bellcore, working with
a few other people there, extended the capabilies of TSSO into the
realm of what we now call Automated Operations.  Since TSSO creates
a TSO-like environment, and CLISTs can run under TSO, Marc's idea
was to use TSO CLISTs as a programming tool to respond and reply
intelligently to console events, automatically.

      Before explaining the automated operations aspects of TSSO,
I have to add a little history of the product.

      Bellcore's version of TSSO is on File 401 of the CBT Tape, and
is called TSSO Version 4.3.  TSSO Version 4.3 carries a Bellcore
copyright notice, but permission was granted by them, for anyone to
use the package as public domain non-supported software.
Subsequently, Bellcore came out with a vendor version of TSSO which
they called TSSO Version 4.4.  They removed their "pay TSSO" from
marketing, a year or two later.  What remained for us, was the Version
4.3, which everyone could use for free.  Dave Cartwright came out with
some free enhancements to TSSO 4.3 a few years ago, and these were
placed on CBT Tape File 402, without being merged with File 401.  Guy
Albertelli merged Cartwright's improvements with TSSO 4.3, and these
were purposely kept separate on the CBT Tape, being placed in File
403.  File 403, until recently, was the most advanced free version of
TSSO.  Recently, an anonymous donor upgraded the File 403 TSSO to run
on OS/390.  This was placed on File 404, in version 415 of the CBT
Tape (not on the NaSPA cd-rom).

      With that done, let me explain how TSSO does console automation.
Each console action and message reply is coded as an assembler macro,
which gets assembled and linkedited into an AOF (Automated Operator
Facility) load module.  In TSSO terms, an AOF load module is called an
AOF table.  You can have many of these AOF tables, each containing a
different collection of console actions.  Only one AOF table is active
at any one time.  A single TSSO console command will activate or
deactivate a given AOF table.  This takes only a second or two.  If you
have to invent a new console action quickly, and all of your assembly
source and JCL is in place, it only takes about two minutes to
assemble, linkedit, and run the TSSO console command to activate your
new AOF table which includes the new action.

      As part of the working mechanism of AOF, TSSO supplies special
TSO commands which perform specific functions.  Among these are the
commands:  OSCMD (to issue an MVS command and get a reply), OSASK
(to ask the operator a question and get a reply), OSWAIT (to wait a
specific amount of time), OSWTO (send a message to the operator),
REPLY (reply to a message that has a message id), MULT (issue multiple
commands on one line), CACHE (to control a cache controller), CPCMD
(to issue a CP command if you're under VM, and get the reply in MVS),
and others.  These commands can either be used directly in a CLIST,
or their execution is part of the action initiated through the AOF
table entries.

      When all this is taken together, you see that TSSO actually
supplies all the primitives to perform extensive automation of the
operator console, and indeed, TSSO was one of the first console
automation packages to come out.  TSSO has the advantages that it
is still available, and you can even use TSSO, while some other
console automation package is also in place.  I don't think that most
of the other automation packages are TSO-like.  If your shop has
another automation package, TSSO can still be used to enter TSO
commands at the console.

      Anyhow, I hope this month's discussion will stimulate you to
take another look at TSSO, to use at your shop.  The time so spent,
will pay you back.  Good luck.  See you next month.

