                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          August 1997

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.


Profiles in Creativity

      This month, we'll begin to feature the work of a few of your
colleagues, who have made sizable contributions to the welfare of MVS
(or OS/390) systems programming.  These people are just like you and
me.  They are systems programmers who maintain MVS at one or more
installed sites.  In the process of doing their jobs, they have come
up with some clever innovations, tools, and methods, to make the work
easier.  However, they have done one more thing.  They have shared
the results of their work with the rest of the systems programming
community.  We can all benefit from their contributions, and therefore
we owe them a hearty: "Thank You!"

      It pays to look at some of these people, and at what they've
done.  We might find that we could do it too.  There are some old
adages which apply: "The way to have friends is to be a friend." "The
way to be happy is to make other people happy."  "The way to be
successful is to sometimes assist other people to also be successful."
"The way to learn is to help other people learn." I might also say:
"The way to be a better systems programmer is to help other systems
programmers."

      This process can work on several levels:  Talking shop with
other systems programmers is one way.  Looking at other people's code
is a second.  Using other people's public domain tools is a third way.
Writing your own tools, and calling another systems programmer for a
discussion of the work, is a fourth.  Contributing software to a
public tape is a fifth way.  And with each of these, if there is an
interaction with between you and another systems programmer, both of
you stand to gain in a big way.

      Before elaborating on the details of this, I might add another
thought.  I have found that often, the most fruitful of these
interactions occur at user groups (such as the SHARE and GUIDE
conferences or a local user group meeting), where the participants are
not from the same shop.  Each person involved in the discussion is in
charge of a different hardware and software configuration, and has a
somewhat different point of view from the next person.  This diversity
provides a fertile ground for learning, on both sides.  Also, since
most of the people who are interacting are not from the same shop,
there is no temptation to have any petty rivalries and such, since
nobody thinks they have anything to gain from these "games".  They are
from different shops, and therefore they will sincerely help one
another.  After a user group meeting is over, the people can phone
or E-mail each other, to continue their discussions and benefit further.

      Let's get down to some examples of how you can learn, and help
others to learn.  I often have telephone conversations with people from
other shops.  Sometimes, I ask them to tell me what problem they are
working on currently.  When they start talking, I often find that I
don't know about either the hardware or the software that is currently
concerning them.  (MVS is quite vast.)  But I ask them to tell me about
it anyway.  In the ensuing process, both of us gain.  I gain, because I
find out about some new stuff I didn't know about before.  They gain,
because they are talking out the problem to a "disinterested" other
party.  They gain clarity of thought, and in the process of discussion,
new ideas and solutions might present themselves out of nowhere.  On
the other hand, if I know something about their problem, I might
directly help them.  On many occasions, I have made short work of
someone else's tough problem, and they have done the same for me.  Both
of us will eventually look good to our respective managements, and will
help our shops in a sizable way.

      Sometimes, the process of interaction occurs when I look at other
people's code.  Where can you find other people's code?  A lot of it is
available on the CBT MVS Utilities Tape, an independently produced
collection of goodies, which can be obtained through the NaSPA office.
There are more collections available through NaSPA, SHARE, and other
groups, as well as online from MVS discussion groups on the Internet.
File 001 (the documentation file) of the CBT MVS Tape, contains
pointers to many other sources of other people's code.  File 071 of the
CBT Tape has the actual documentation files from these other tapes and
sources.  A lot of this material is obtainable on the NaSPA CD-roms.

      When I look at some code from these places, the author's name and
address is usually found there too.  A lot of times, if the author
hasn't moved, I can call that person directly and have a discussion.
I can personally testify that you don't have to be shy about calling
anyone up.  In my entire career, I have called hundreds of these
people, and not one of them has been impolite to me in any way.  They
are more than anxious to discuss their work with any person interested
in it.  And I have formed many telephone and E-mail friendships with
knowledgeable people.  There is no reason to be bashful.  These are
the people I will call, when I have a problem.  They have all been
very courteous and helpful to me.  I try to be the same way with them.
The way to have a friend is to be a friend.  And both of you gain from
it.

      Using a public domain tool, without actually looking at the code,
is another way to learn by finding other people.  I'll often assemble
someone's utility from the CBT Tape and install it.  Then, I'd try to
learn as much as possible about using the tool from the documentation.
During this process, sometimes I can get to talk to the author and
learn more.  Other times, I'll ask if anyone else has experience with
this tool, at a user group meeting.  Or, I'll ask one of my telephone
friends.  In the process, I'll often gain a ton of system knowledge,
and I'll also learn how to deploy the tool in crucial system
situations.

      Finally, sometimes I am writing a program to address a system
problem, or to access a certain system resource, and the IBM
documentation isn't especially clear.  I'd like to see a coding example.
Plenty of examples can often be found on the CBT Tape, or in one of the
other sources.  I can call up the author, or one of my telephone
friends mentioned above, to discuss how best to approach my particular
implementation of the system facility.  This personal interaction
process speeds up the coding, and I usually produce a better utility
program than I would otherwise have done.

      Now that we've talked about the first four aspects of this
process, let's meet some people who have made contributions to public
tapes, and see what they've done to help us.


A PUBLIC TAPE AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS

      One public tape that I am familiar with, is the CBT MVS Tape.
Contributions, "large" and "small", come from all sorts of people in
our business.  No contribution is too small.  If an idea will help
somebody to save time or money, it is useful, and is worth contributing.
My friend Eli Duttman (File 195 from the CBT Tape) has contributed some
very simple, but surprisingly useful CLISTs, which help him every day
in his work.  Consider, for example, a CLIST that contains one line
and one command:  LOGOFF.  You can name this CLIST anything you want,
so it won't confict with another command.  In my last shop, we called
it X.  Thus, if you're in TSO READY mode and you want to LOGOFF quickly,
you just type X and press ENTER.  You might also alias the name of this
CLIST as LOG, LOGO, and LOGOF, etc. (the possibilities are endless),
and you don't have to put it into a public CLIST library, so it won't
interfere with the general public.  It's a very simple idea, but it's
darn useful and it saves time when you have to get out quickly.

      There are a huge number of other people who have made all sorts
of contributions to the CBT tape.  I'd like to mention a few of the
names in particular, just to show something about the kind of work they
have done, and how diverse their backgrounds are.

      Let's consider David Cartwright from England (CBT Tape File 172),
Vinh Vu (originally from Vietnam) who lives in Texas (File 166), Paul
Moinil from Italy (Files 453 thru 459), Gilbert Saint-flour (originally
from France) who has contributed File 183, Greg Price from Australia
(Files 134 and 135), and Jim Marshall (formerly of the U.S. Air Force),
who is responsible for Files 300, 316, and 161, among others.

      Dave Cartwright is an original thinker, and he has worked in
mainland Europe as well as in England.  Since Dave speaks and reads
German, he could easily profit from the German and Swiss G.U.I.D.E.
tapes.  In fact, he is responsible for making them available in the
United States (Dave sent them to me, and I contributed them to the
CBT Overflow Tape--also obtainable through NaSPA).  Dave's software
collection encompasses some novel ideas, a few of which I'll mention
here.

      Consider CAVEAT (Cartwright's Amazing VSAM Entity Automatic
Tuning).  This is a program which takes as input, the mere dataset name
of any VSAM dataset on your system.  The CAVEAT program looks into the
system (particularly the VVDS) to find out how the dataset is defined,
and outputs IDCAMS ALTER cards to optimize the number of index buffers,
so the entire INDEX set is always in main storage.  Until recently,
this worked "amazingly" well.  It could be driven off any list of VSAM
datasets, to optimize access time to the data, by adjusting the number
of index (or even data) buffers for all of these datasets.
Unfortunately in the latest versions of DFP, IBM has taken away the
BUFNI and BUFND parameters from the ALTER command of IDCAMS, but you
have to admit that the ideas behind CAVEAT are dynamite.  It may be
possible to fix CAVEAT to output VSAM JCL, where the buffer parameters
may still be found.  Any person's work to fix CAVEAT for the latest DFP
will be greatly appreciated.  You can get the address of the proprietor
of the CBT Tape through the NaSPA office, and contribute your work
there.

      Dave Cartwright has a lot of other good things on his CBT Tape
file.  Among these are an external writer to archive SYSOUT to tape or
SMS datasets.  This is called CHEW (Cartwright's Housekeeping External
Writer).  Once your SYSOUT is on SMS, HSM can manage it.  This might
be a good idea for your shop.  Among Dave's SMF reporting programs is
CRAP (Cartwright's RACF Accounting Program) which reads SMF Type 80
RACF records and produces reports.  If you have documents in old
Waterloo Script format (see the CBT Overflow Tape for that), and you
now have DCF/GML, Dave has an edit macro to convert the document.  And
there's much more on his file for you to profit from.  Dave told me
that when he has to write a new program, he himself profits from File
172 by borrowing "already tested" segments of code from there.  Dave's
E-mail address is:  dcuk@dcuk.demon.co.uk

      Vinh Vu (CBT Tape File 166) is equally creative, although his
stuff deals with different things.  Vinh has a program to display Job
activity, a REXX exec to display MVS control blocks, linklist, APFLIST
etc., a program to refresh any single module in LLA (or VLF), and he
has much more than that.  His file is very much worth exploring.

      Paul Moinil is one amazing person.  At last report, he has been
working in Ispra, Italy, at a shop which was discontinuing its use of
MVS.  Paul's AMDAHL representative in Italy, Antonio Colombo, sent this
enormous collection of over 300,000 lines of code, to the proprietor of
the CBT Tape.  Much of what Paul did, was to make modifications, large
and small, to improve a very large number of public domain programs.
This is in addition to Paul's original work.  The files (453 through
459) are so large, that I can't single out a few things which are
especially noteworthy.  But I will say this:  If you have some favorite
program from the CBT Tape, such as Fullscreen ZAP for example (see File
134), I'll advise you to also look at Paul's version of it to see what
he's done, and how he's modified it.  Also, if you want to find many
convenient ways to shorten your system work, you would do well to search
through Paul's files and see what he has there.

      My good friend Gilbert Saint-flour has contributed File 183 to
the CBT Tape.  I have written in the past about his amazing SHOWMVS
program, which in its latest version that I have used, produced over
4000 lines of output, reporting all kinds of status about our large
MVS system and my own TSO session.  File 183 is a large collection of
useful and varied tools, such as the LOADMLPA program to refresh MLPA
on the fly, or an SVCUPDTE program to do the same for a Type 3 SVC.
There is a program to prevent timeouts of your TSO session, a
generalized extension of the ISPF BROWSE facility, and there is much
other miscellaneous software to help you.  Gilbert has done a lot for
us.

      Greg Price in Melbourne Australia, cut a lot of his System
Programmer teeth writing and modifying MVS software for Fujitsu systems.
Since Fujitsu hardware and software (to my knowledge) is not sold in
the U.S., Greg's experience cannot be recreated easily here.  His
collection of his own, and his friends' software from Australia, is
very extensive.  Many of his programs, such as his vast extension to
Bill Godfrey's REVIEW "file browsing" program, reflect enormous system
and control block knowledge.  I know this from my many long
conversations with Greg.  Much of his knowledge specifically comes
from the differences between Fujitsu software and MVS.  We can all
profit from it, by looking at Greg's files (134 and 135) on the CBT
Tape.

      Jim Marshall was in the U.S. Air Force as a Systems Programmer
for many years, during which time he had the privilege of working
together with many skilled coders.  Jim sent the other people's stuff
to the CBT Tape and the MVS SHARE Tape (now part of the CBT Overflow
Tape).  Bill Godfrey, who was a pioneer in MVS system coding, told me
that his code would never have been known (and improved) by the
public, had it not been for Jim Marshall.  Jim contributes a very
large file of TSO programs and commands (File 300) and a large file of
batch utilities (File 316).  My own career has been greatly shaped by
the fact that Jim Marshall took the time and made the effort to send
other people's code in.  You owe what you're reading to Jim Marshall,
my teacher Jeff Broido, and to all the others who took some time to
help someone else.

      That's it for now.  Help yourself by helping and contacting
others.  Good luck.  See you next month.

