                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                           June 1997

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.


TIMING OUT

      Probably, most of you have not always had the System Programmer's
"silver spoon" in your mouths for your entire career in data
processing.  In other words, you probably have not had "PC Status"
(Privileged Character Status).  One of the features of PC Status is
that your own TSO Session does not "time out" and get logged off with a
System 522 abend, after a designated number of minutes of inactivity.
You can leave the office and stay logged on, all day.

      From the administrator's point of view, this privilege of "not
timing out" is undesirable for the "average" TSO user to have.
Therefore, in most installations, such power is not given to them.
Why is it better that an average TSO user should not time out?  First,
any logged-on TSO user allocates a certain number of datasets, and ties
them up with a shared enqueue, so no one else can get an exclusive
enqueue to these datasets if that is needed.  Second, even a
swapped-out TSO user is tying up an address space and some system
resources; this user might even stop a new user from logging on, if the
MAXUSERS number (of logged-on users) is being approached.  Third, if
that TSO session is being hung while no one skilled is around, it would
be very difficult to free the session.  An automatic session time-out
would be helpful.  There are probably several other reasons you can
think of.  For most TSO users, a forced time-out after a period of
inactivity would be very desirable.

      Of course for us PC's, none of these reasons apply, since all of
us can fix any problem we might cause.  Yeah, right.  Anyway, for the
rest of this article, I'd like to talk about this idea of timing out.


X22-TYPE ABENDS.

      Where does the subject start?  I'd say it starts with a talk
about purposely killing an address space.  IBM has graciously provided
us with several means of "chopping off" jobs, started tasks, and TSO
sessions in the middle of their activity.  We've all heard of cancelling
or forcing jobs and TSO sessions.  When a job produces excessive output,
we might want to chop it off before it floods our printing resources or
JES spool space.  CPU time excession abends have occasionally been part
of our experience.  Sometimes, we run a big SMP job in the wrong class,
and it exceeds that class' allowable CPU time, getting cut short in the
middle.  All of these "cutoffs" are related by the fact that the system
abends which result, nearly all end with the characters '22'.

      What are some of these System X22-type abends.  A system abend
122 occurs when the operator cancelled a job, requesting a dump.  A
system 222 is an operator cancel, without a dump.  This is very
common.  A system 322 is a CPU time excession cancel of a job.  A
system 422 is new, and is similar to a 222, but it is done by an Open
Systems MVS application.  A system 522 results from excession of the
Job Wait Time (JWT) parameter in the SMF parms in SYS1.PARMLIB.  This
is the "timing out" abend we are considering today.  A system 622 abend
happens when something goes wrong with TSO, or your session gets
disconnected from the terminal and the reconnect limit time passes.  A
system 722 abend happens if the job puts out a lot of output, exceeding
the JES or JOB card output limits, and the OUTLIM parameter was not
coded in the job's JCL to override these limits.  A system 822 abend
happens when the region requsted for a job step cannot be obtained.  A
system 922 abend occurs if the INITIATOR is now in control of a job,
before or after the job step has taken place, and an ABEND or other
interruption occurs.  A system A22 abend occurs after a FORCE operator
command was issued, and the address space was "burned", or chopped off
forcibly, no matter what it had been doing before.

      We have faced nearly all of these abends in our careers.
Sometimes we are happy when one occurs.  Other times, we can be very
disappointed.  Today we'll talk about some tricks we can do, to avoid
the situations in which we are disappointed.

      Please remember that, by and large, we are PC's (Privileged
Characters) in our profession.  But sometimes, the management in a shop
might even think that we PC's have to be restricted.  Nevertheless, we
still are the system doctors, and we still need our tools to do the job
that this same management asks from us.  It's like what the parent
demanded of the school bus driver:  "Be careful and drive slowly, but
get my child to school quickly."  The bus driver still has to get that
child to school, safely, despite the parent's protests.  And we have to
do the job that our management requires of us, safely, but quickly too,
without unnecessary hassles and interruptions.

      So if management does not allow us to stop our sessions from
timing out with a S522 abend, and the job requires that we have to run
several parallel sessions on one or more systems for an extended period
of time, without their timing out, what advice do we have?  How can we
circumvent our management's restrictions and still do the job that they
ask of us?  This is today's subject.


WAYS OF AVOIDING SYSTEM 522 ABENDS.

      A system 522 abend is caused, often, by a TSO session's
inactivity.  How long it takes to trigger the time-out depends on the
setting of the Job Wait Time (JWT) parameter in the SMFPRMxx member of
SYS1.PARMLIB (in minutes).  All non-altered TSO sessions will time out
in this number of minutes.  How can we override this time-out in our
own TSO session, and not affect the average TSO user?

      One way to avoid the time-out is to have your own TSO logon
procedure in a PROC library.  This would also require that SYS1.UADS
or the security package (RACF, ACF2, Top Secret, etc.) be set up so
that the use of your own procedure would be allowed, when your id is
used to logon to TSO.  Your own logon procedure, which in effect, is
JCL, can be then coded with TIME=1440 or TIME=NOLIMIT in the EXEC card
which invokes the terminal monitor program (usually IKJEFT01 or
ADFMDF03).  This will override a short JWT setting and will keep your
own TSO session "on the air".

      Some installations do not allow this, although nowadays it is
unusual to find such "backward" places.  These installations, while
recognizing that systems programmers have different requirements in
their TSO sessions than do application programmers, will allow one
logon PROC for application programmers and another one (or several)
for systems programmers.  They will not allow, however, a systems
programmer to have a private logon PROC.  And they will also not allow
TIME=1440 or TIME=NOLIMIT to be coded in any of these PROCs.  In many
places, the systems programmers are not the security administrators.
What can we do now?

      A common solution is to have (or write) a program which runs
continuously in a TSO session if nothing else is running, and which
has a timer built in.  For example, the timer will pop every five
minutes.  When the timer pops, the program triggers some small TSO
activity, to fool the session into thinking that the session is not
inactive.  Therefore, the session will never time out.

      If your installation sufficiently recognizes the importance of
certain users not timing out, there is another possible approach.  This
is via the SMF exit IEFUTL, which can be used to control the effect of
Job Wait Time on jobs, started tasks, or TSO sessions.  An interesting
and general solution that can be implemented with management approval,
operates through RACF, or whatever security package you have.  I'll
show an example using RACF.  You define an entity to RACF in the
FACILITY class called TSOWAIT.  Those users who will not time out, are
given READ access to this entity.  Then an IEFUTL exit can be coded,
which does a RACROUTE call for the TSO user, to ask if READ access is
granted to this entity, and if so, an infinite time extension is given
to the TSO session.  Management administers this solution officially,
through the security administrators, and everything is above board.

      This IEFUTL exit can be quite easily coded.  An example can be
found on File 245 of the CBT MVS Utilities Tape, a huge, independently
produced tape of MVS goodies available through NaSPA.  The IEFUTL exit
found there, can be simplified even further.  Besides the RACROUTE call,
there is very little to it, just either a time extension or a bypass of
the time extension, based on the result of the RACROUTE call.  If you
have other IEFUTL exits in use at your installation, don't worry.  SMF
exits can be very easily piggybacked, so they all run in succession.

      Another solution which is very clever, can be found on File 183 of
the CBT MVS Tape.  This solution requires that ISPF be running in your
TSO session.  To implement this solution judiciously, not including too
many people in the timeout exemption, you should have a restricted or a
private load library to put into the ISPLLIB concatenation.  This can be
done dynamically in a CLIST using the ALLOCATE TSO command, even if your
TSO session is using a public logon proc.  Just get out of ISPF, FREE
FILE(ISPLLIB), and issue an ALLOCATE command with the proper ISPLLIB
libraries concatenated in the proper order.  That can all be done in one
CLIST.  Finally, assemble and linkedit the source code for the ISPTASK
module on File 183, non-reentrant and non-reusable, into this private
library.  With ISPF running, your TSO session will not time out during
weekdays, until 7 PM on Friday evening.  Examine the source code of the
ISPTASK module on File 183 to see how this works.  You can alter the
source code if you have different timeout exemption requirements.

      I'll explain it better.  The user version of the ISPTASK module
from File 183, is designed to front-end IBM's ISPTASK module, which is
either in the link list, or in LPA.  IBM's ISPTASK module is reentrant.
This user front-end is not.  The user ISPTASK, as coded, works as
follows:  First, upon getting control, it pre-loads a bunch of ISPF
modules into the Job Pack Queue for more efficient operation if these
modules were not put in LPALIB, but were running from the link list.
This is not important for our purpose, but I'm just mentioning it for
completeness.  Afterwards, our user ISPTASK determines what day of the
week it is (Monday through Friday) and conditionally passes control
to the STIMER routine that jogs the TSO session into "activity" every
10 minutes.  It only does this from Monday at 12 midnight until Friday
at 7 PM.  Finally, it does a lot of searching through TCB's, looking
for IBM's actual copy of ISPTASK, avoiding ISPLLIB and STEPLIB, looking
for a re-entrant module.  Upon finding the proper copy of ISPTASK, it
XCTL's to it.  Meanwhile, the STIMER keeps popping itself every 10
minutes, and the TSO session does not time out, because of this
"activity".

      I hope today's discussion has been interesting and helpful to
you.  Maybe you yourselves can find other ways to do this job.  I've
always thought that systems programmers were a clever bunch.  Good
luck, and keep those timers popping.  See you next month.


