                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                           April 1997

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.


HARNESSING MACRO POWER - PART 2

      Last month, we discussed the topic of turning system macros,
which operate from within assembler programs, into utilites that we
can use.  This topic seems a bit daunting for many of us, and I must
admit that toward the beginning of my career, when I wasn't so good at
programming in assembler language, I was at something of a loss when
shown a macro facility.  I figured that I myself could never use the
facility, because I felt dependent on someone else to write the
programs for me.

      Today, I'd like to show you that even if you're only fair at
assembler, you can still harness system macro facilities for yourself.
I'll go into a little more detail as to the kind of things you can do
in a program, and I'll give you another example to study.


THE GBHABEND PROGRAM

      We'll start our discussion with an example of what my friend
Gordon Hampton did with the ABEND macro.  The ABEND macro is a system
facility which ends a job and produces a system abend, killing all
subsequent steps in the job stream, so they are not executed.  Abends
can have several types of codes.  These are:  system codes, user
codes, and system code with reason code.  Optionally, if a SYSUDUMP,
SYSABEND, or SYSMDUMP ddcard is included in the JCL, a virtual storage
dump is produced in the step.  The value of the abend code is
displayed in the JCL output for the job step.  System abend codes are
hex values, and they range from X'000' to X'FFF'.  User abend codes
have the same range, but they are expressed in decimal values from 0
to 4096.  Reason codes that accompany system codes, can have the same
range, expressed in decimal values from 0 to 4096.  The GBHABEND
program can invoke the ABEND macro to reproduce any of these abend
codes, driven by a parm value.  See Figure 1.

      An application program which ends abnormally or because of a
programming error, in such a situation where the programmer did not
provide an error routine, will often cause a system abend.  Also,
many operating system programs which end abnormally, do so via either
the ABEND macro, or the service it invokes, SVC 13.  However, some
system utilities will almost never produce an abend under normal
conditions, even if there is a severe error.  The notable example of
such a program is IDCAMS, the utility which handles VSAM files.

      At this point, we can see one practical use for Gordon's
program.  Suppose you have a multi-step job stream which involves the
creation or manipulation of VSAM files.  The success or failure of such
a "VSAM" job step will involve a return code, rather than a system
abend.  If a certain job step is supposed to create an important VSAM
file, and it fails, then instead of an abend, a return code of 12 will
be issued by the job step.  If you'd want to kill the rest of the job
stream because of the step failure, one way would be to code a COND
parameter on all subsequent job steps.  Another way would be to code
just one job step, invoking the GBHABEND program with a COND parameter
on it, that would abend the rest of the job then and there.  Figure 1
shows how this is done.  Of course on newer systems, with IF-THEN-ELSE
coding in the JCL, the same thing could also be accomplished, but the
GBHABEND method works on all systems, old and new.

      Gordon had another use for his program.  Since he could induce
the ABEND macro to produce an abend with any code:  system, user, or
system with reason code, he could do simulations.  For example, one
could study the effect of a system or a user abend with a certain code,
on a job stream, without having to actually execute the offending job
step.  One could merely execute the GBHABEND program with the proper
parameters and reproduce the exact abend code in the job stream.

      To complete the simulation picture, one would have to write a
program which produces a given condition code depending on a parm.
This is extremely easy to write, and all of you can do so as an
exercise.  Just be sure to test your program out in a job stream, to
make sure it works properly.  The program should do as follows:  Save
the registers, then read the parm, which is pointed to by Register 1
plus 2.  The length of the parm field is a halfword pointed to by
Register 1 itself.  If there is no parm, the program should do nothing.
If there is a parm, once the EBCDIC value of the parm is extracted, you
can pack it, and convert it to binary in a fullword of storage.  Then
return control to the caller, with all registers restored except for
Register 15, which has been loaded from the fullword containing the
binary value obtained from the parm.  That's all there is to it.

      Source code for the GBHABEND program may be found on File 233 of
the CBT MVS Utilities Tape, a large collection of free software which
can be obtained through the NaSPA office.  Optionally, this program
can be downloaded from the Nascom bulletin board.  GBHABEND is a
practical and useful program for any installation to have.


DISPLAYING HEX VALUES

      Nowadays, many system macros are designed to return binary
tokens, codes, or similar types of values.  It makes sense, that if
we possessed a technique of displaying a binary value in a program,
we could look at the output of all these macros, and possibly learn
something about what these token values are.

      I have done this kind of work myself in a few programs that are
publicly available.  An example of code which does such hex displays
is on File 247 of the CBT MVS Tape, and is a program called BCMLISY.
BCMLISY is a TSO command which displays any TSO user's SYS1.BRODCAST
messages.  However, besides displaying the text of the messages
alone, it also displays, for each message, the relative record address,
in hex, of that message within the SYS1.BRODCAST dataset.  I took the
technique of displaying a hexadecimal value in readable numbers, from
Bill Godfrey.  Figure 2 displays the elements of the technique, and has
snippets of code from the BCMLISY program, which accomplish the display.

      This display technique for hex values, is packaged as a macro.
In order for the macro to function, a few other ingredients need to be
coded into the program.  All of these ingredients are shown in Figure
2.  The macro is called HEX, and its operands are three.  The first
operand is the target area for the EBCDIC display bytes.  This is twice
the size of the hexadecimal original data.  The second operand is the
number of hex bytes to be expanded.  The third operand is the hex
source data.  As Figure 2 shows, the HEX macro invokes the HEX
subroutine that uses Registers 15, 0, and 1 as work registers, to
expand one byte of hex into two bytes of display characters at a time.
You can see exactly how this code works by looking at Figure 2.

      It remains for me to indicate, at this point, how the expanded
data is to be displayed to a user of the program.  If the program is
a batch program, you can use QSAM PUT to print an output line of
display.  If the program is a TSO command, the TPUT or PUTLINE macros
can be used to display the output at a terminal.  PUTLINE is harder
to use than TPUT, but PUTLINE results can be printed to a hardcopy
device, whereas TPUT results cannot; they can only be sent directly
to a terminal.  A coding example of how to use PUTLINE can be found
in the BCMLISY program from File 247 of the CBT Tape.  The code and
actual technique is the work of Bill Godfrey.  The TSO/E Programming
manual, I believe, spells out the directions for doing TSO output
using PUTLINE, but you can also copy Bill Godfrey's code, which works
fine.  Bill Godfrey already did the work, and you don't have to knock
your head against the manual to untangle what it says.

      What is the point of all of this, for our subject?  You can now
take any system macro in the books which can be induced to return a
token value.  Then you can write a simple program to invoke the macro
under control of parameters that were externally supplied, either by
a parm or by control cards.  After that, you can use the hex display
technique to display or print the results.  This technique becomes a
great diagnostic and learning tool.

      I've had to be brief this month, but I hope these techniques
will prove of value in your work.  I think that this idea of displaying
the results of macro calls is a bit novel, and it can be very very
useful.  If you actually follow these ideas up, you can gain much
system knowledge and you can profit very much.  Good luck with your
efforts.  See you again next month.


  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 1.   How to use Gordon Hampton's GBHABEND program to abend
            a job step with any ABEND code you would like to specify.
            The parms you specify are fed by the program into the
            ABEND system macro, to produce the desired result.  This
            is a clear example of a program which feeds the user's
            parameters into a system macro.


   Full format of the parms is as follows:
      SNNN - GIVES SYSTEM ABEND NNN.
      UNNNN - GIVES USER ABEND NNNN.
      NNNN - GIVES USER ABEND NNNN.
      RMMMNNN - GIVES SYSTEM ABEND MMM WITH REASON CODE NNN.
   If you don't follow this format you may get strange results.

    JCL to run is as follows:

   //BOOMSTEP EXEC PGM=GBHABEND,PARM=U1288,COND=(8,GT,PREVSTEP)
   //STEPLIB  DD DISP=SHR,DSN=MY.STEPLIB
   //SYSABEND DD SYSOUT=*

   This will cause a user abend of 1288 on BOOMSTEP
     if PREVSTEP had a condition code of 8 or greater.

   If you don't want a dump to be produced, leave out the
     SYSABEND DD card.


  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 2.   Code to support the display of hexadecimal numbers in
            EBCDIC.  This code was taken from the BCMLISY program
            whose source code is on File 247 of the CBT MVS Utilities
            Tape.  I think the original author of the code is Bill
            Godfrey.  Inline code is the HEX macro, which takes an
            n-byte hexadecimal field and expands it into a 2n-byte
            EBCDIC display field.


    Here are two separate invocations of the HEX macro, to expand
    two 3-byte hex numbers into 6-byte display format.

         HEX   LINE+10,3,USDRBA        Display 3-byte hex fields
         HEX   LINE+18,3,USDEND           in 6-byte EBCDIC fields.


    This is the supporting code for the HEX macro:  First is the
    macro itself, followed by the byte-by-byte display expansion
    routine.

         MACRO
&NAME    HEX   &TO,&LEN,&FROM
&NAME    STM   15,1,HEXSAVE
         LA    1,&FROM
         LA    0,&LEN
         LA    15,&TO
         BAL   4,HEX
         LM    15,1,HEXSAVE
         MEND



HEX      MVC   1(1,R15),0(R1)      MOVE BYTE
         UNPK  0(3,R15),1(2,R15)   UNPACK
         TR    0(2,R15),HEXTAB-240
         LA    R15,2(,R15)         INCREMENT OUTPUT PTR
         LA    R1,1(,R1)           INCREMENT INPUT PTR
         BCT   R0,HEX              DECREMENT LENGTH, THEN LOOP
         MVI   0(R15),C' '         BLANK THE TRAILING BYTE
         BR    R4                  RETURN TO CALLER
HEXTAB   DC    C'0123456789ABCDEF' TRANSLATE TABLE


    These are the data areas referred to by the above code.


HEXSAVE  DS    3F          Register save for HEX macro


USDRBA   DS    AL3 -          RELATIVE BLOCK ADDRESS (RBA) OF FIRST
*                               MESSAGE FOR THIS USERID (ZERO IF NONE)
USDEND   DS    AL3 -          RBA OF LAST MESSAGE FOR THIS USERID
*                               (ZERO IF NONE)


