                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          October 1997

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.


WHY NOT RUN A BATCH JOB?

      Often, we forget our roots.  While we're caught up in the
latest developments in our industry, we forget that our field has had
a rich past.  We're not exactly punching cards any more, but the vast
potential of running system utilities via a batch job, has yet to be
fully tapped and exploited.  Today, I'd like to open your eyes to
worlds of opportunity, in our current environment, that lay yet unused
by most of us.  After you've finished reading this article, the concept
of running a batch job will have a lot of new meaning.

      While it seems that most of us have our JCL handy, to run batch
jobs for our work, I am under the impression that we don't usually
think of this JCL when we are trying to fix something.  For example, we
have JCL to back up a disk pack with FDR or DFDSS (or whatever utility
you use to back up a pack).  We use JCL when we want to initialize a
pack (because that's how ICKDSF is usually run on an MVS system).
Allocating a complicated VSAM file is another case when we run (and
save) the JCL.  However, if a large collection of datasets (such as
DLIBs) has the wrong allocation parameters, such as too few directory
blocks, or too small a secondary space allocation, we don't think of
running a batch job to fix that situation.  I'll talk more about this,
later.

      I always save my old JCL.  I worked at one shop for almost seven
years, and the JCL collection from there consisted of almost 2300 pds
members.  My collection from another shop, where I was working for
almost five years, amounted to well over 1000 new members.  While I was
working at the later shop, my collection of JCL from the earlier shop
was always online and handy.  I also save different copies of the JCL
from different runs, and I don't often retype over old JCL if the job is
a bit complicated, or a particular case is unique.  I make another copy.
Why do I do this?  And how do I manage to quickly find the exact JCL
model that I need?

      My own JCL philosophy is based on the premise that I am the
"doctor", responsible for the "health" and smooth running of the
installation's operating systems at all times.  If there is a system
emergency that requires running a batch job to fix, I do not want to
spend a lot of time customizing my "one copy" of ICKDSF or IEBCOPY JCL
to adapt to that particular emergency.  I'd rather have a copy of JCL
handy, which is very close to what I need.  Maybe a dataset name is
different, and that's all.  Then, I'll solve the problem much quicker,
and be less prone to making a typing error that could spoil more than
it fixes.  This accounts for why I prefer to have many IEBCOPY or
ICKDSF jobs around, for example.  How do I find the right JCL quickly?
That's another question.

      I have two basic techniques for quickly finding the right JCL.
The first is my naming system for jobs.  I always assume that I'll keep
more than one copy of any kind of job.  I'll start by naming one
prototype JCL member with a normal name, such as IEBCOPY.  Afterwards,
all the subsequent copies, which are variations of the first copy, will
have ordered suffixes, so the next IEBCOPY job will be called IEBCOP01,
and the next, IEBCOP02, and so on.  Or I might use IEBCOPYA, IEBCOPYB,
etc.  Then, I use the ISPF technique of pulling partial member lists,
to keep things relatively simple and easy to find.  However, I have
another tool, which is my ace in the hole.

      For many years, I have used the multi-talented free utility
called "PDS", from the CBT MVS Utilities Tape (File 182) or its
vendor-supported successor called "STARTOOL" (from Serena in
Burlingame, California).  The PDS utility supported its own member list
system, which allowed for partial ISPF member listing, years before
ISPF itself did.  In addition, PDS can build its partial member list on
the basis of whether a certain data string is found, or not found, in
that member.  This allows me to find all of the IEBCOPY JCL easily, for
example.  Suppose I have a large partitioned dataset of JCL, not
necessarily my own (so it's not organized with my nice member name
convention), and I want to find all of the IEBCOPY jobs and make a
partial member list of them only.  I simply point PDS to the dataset
where I have the JCL, and enter the command:

        FIND : /PGM=IEBCOPY/ THEN(MEMLIST)

This means that PDS should look at all dataset members (the colon ":"
means "all members of the dataset"), and choose only members containing
the data string "PGM=IEBCOPY".  Then it should construct a partial ISPF
member list containing only those members in which it found the string.
From that PDS member list, I can BROWSE, EDIT, RENAME, or SUBMIT any
member.  So you see that with this tool, I have no trouble at all,
handling a huge JCL dataset with ease.  It doesn't even have to be my
own JCL.  It can be anybody's.

      That's how I handle batch JCL in general.  Now we'll talk about
some batch job techniques you may not have heard of.  But even if you've
heard of them, you probably haven't fully exploited them.


SOME BATCH JOB INNOVATIONS - TSO-IN-BATCH

      Batch jobs have the advantage that they don't tie up your
terminal.  A batch job runs in its own address space that was started
by an initiator, while your TSO terminal session runs in a different
address space at the same time.  Suppose a TSO task is tedious, and
takes a lot of time at the terminal.  Often, you can set this task up
to run as a batch job instead, and when it's finished, you can examine
the result.

      A batch job which executes TSO commands, uses a technique called
"TSO-in-batch".  To set up a TSO-in-batch job, you execute PGM=IKJEFT01,
which is the normal IBM TSO terminal monitor program.  Required DD names
are SYSTSPRT (instead of SYSPRINT), SYSTERM, and SYSTSIN (in place of
SYSIN).  TSO commands are entered as data in the SYSTSIN DD name, or in
the PARM field.  A sample TSO-in-batch job is shown in Figure 1.

      Output from a TSO command, which normally goes to a terminal,
can go to the SYSTSPRT DD name under certain conditions.  There are
two main techniques for producing terminal output in a TSO command.
These are either from the IBM services TPUT and TGET, or from a
different set of services called PUTLINE, GETLINE, and PUTGET.  The
TPUT service is easier to use in a program, but it has the disadvantage
that its terminal output cannot be sent to the SYSTSPRT DD name when
the command is run under TSO-in-batch.  The PUTLINE service is harder
to program, but all the terminal output will appear in the SYSTSPRT
DD name under TSO-in-batch, and it can be sent to a dataset for further
processing, or to keep for a later time.

      Now we'll get to the nitty-gritty of this article--the
innovations.  All of the following examples are planned as prototypes,
to get you to start thinking of new things you can do.  Given these
examples, and some cleverness, you'll expand your techniques to cover
lots of new situations in which you can get a job done.

      Let's start with something relatively simple.  Almost any TSO
command can be run under TSO-in-batch.  If you don't care about the
output, even a program that uses the TPUT interface, can be run
usefully.  I'll give an example.  Most IBM-supplied TSO commands have
been programmed using the PUTLINE service.  However a notorious
exception is IBM's TSO RENAME command, which uses the TPUT interface.
Nevertheless, if you have a large number of datasets to rename, you
can create a card-image dataset with the general format:

   RENAME dataset.name.a1  dataset.name.b1
   RENAME dataset.name.a2  dataset.name.b2
   RENAME dataset.name.a3  dataset.name.b3

and point the SYSTSIN DD name in a TSO-in-batch job to this dataset.
The TSO command RENAME will do its work, but the SYSTSPRT DD name will
not show any output from the command executions.  It doesn't matter.
Most probably, the datasets will be properly renamed, unless there is
an outstanding enqueue on one of the names.  You can use ISPF 3.4 or a
VTOC listing utility to find out how well the renames worked.  This
technique is especially good, if you have to rename hundreds, or
thousands of datasets at a time, and the datasets are cataloged.

      Another direction in which TSO-in-batch is supremely useful, is
when we're trying to see a display or a report from a TSO command or a
CLIST, and the TSO command or CLIST is long-running.  To execute the TSO
command or CLIST from a terminal, would tie up the terminal for an
excessively long time, and would interfere with our other work.  Of
course, this technique would only be useful for those TSO commands which
are programmed using the PUTLINE terminal interface.  For example, a
system TSO administrator would like to synchronize userids in the
SYS1.BRODCAST dataset with the current collection of TSO userids.
Issuing the ACCOUNT and SYNC TSO commands from the terminal might take a
long time.  Instead, this administrator might run a TSO-in-batch job
under the (privileged) administrator userid.  A lot of terminal time
would be saved, and the job's report, with its time and date records,
could be archived as proof that the job was done properly.  Reports
produced by other TSO commands, with longer outputs, can be similarly
generated and archived for your records.

      A third direction in which we can go, is to use non-IBM commands
and batch programs.  The CBT MVS Tape, an independently produced
collection of free software (which can be ordered through NaSPA),
contains a huge collection of such TSO commands and batch programs.
We shall use some examples from the CBT Tape as starters, to get you
to look further at the possibilities in this direction.

      For example, let's consider Bill Godfrey's CDSCB (change the
DSCB) TSO command from File 300 of the CBT Tape.  CDSCB is an
authorized TSO command, which changes the dataset allocation attributes
of a dataset, such as BLKSIZE, LRECL, RECFM, and secondary SPACE.  This
is done by changing the VTOC entry directly.  However, it is safer to
use CDSCB than to directly zap the VTOC, because you know that the
correct VTOC fields will be changed.  CDSCB also has a tremendous
advantage because it can be used in batch.  Hundreds of datasets can be
fixed at the same time.  How is this useful in a practical situation?

      Everyone knows that the dataset allocations of IBM's distributed
system datasets, leave much to be desired, especially if the datasets
are to be reused later.  Often, when IBM distributes a set of DLIBs or
TARGET libraries, the secondary space will be 1 track for a small
dataset, and if that library is reused, it can quickly run out of
extents.  A mass APPLY or ACCEPT job can easily fail.  Another source
of dataset failure is when there aren't enough directory blocks.  I'll
deal with that later.  I can solve the secondary allocation problem
for all your DLIBs, in one fell swoop, using CDSCB.

     You can run a TSO-in-batch job, using CDSCB, by creating a
dataset consisting of your list of DLIBs.  You might even create this
list, using ISPF 3.4 run in batch.  (ISPF can be run in batch.  So can
SDSF.  See the appropriate IBM manuals, because I don't have space to
discuss that topic here.)  The list of DLIB names should be edited and
converted into a format similar to the following:

   CDSCB  dlib.name.a   ALLOC(TR) SPACE(15)
   CDSCB  dlib.name.b   ALLOC(TR) SPACE(15)

and so on.  This will make sure that secondary space allocation will
be in tracks, for each named dataset, and that each secondary extent
allocation will be 15 tracks, instead of perhaps, 1 track.  For larger
datasets, you can set the secondary allocation to be appropriately
larger.  Running this job, will reset all of the secondary allocations.

      There is a catch here.  CDSCB has to be run authorized.  I'll
now tell you a fact.  Load module IKJTABLS, which contains CSECT
IKJEFTE2 that contains the names of authorized TSO commands allowed,
will override the global TSO Parmlib settings, provided that it is run
from an authorized library as an authorized STEPLIB.  You can therefore
create your own copy of IKJTABLS, with CDSCB zapped into IKJEFTE2, and
put it in your own authorized STEPLIB.  If you use that library as a
STEPLIB in a TSO-in-batch job, CDSCB will work.  See Files 185 and 186
on the CBT Tape for help.

      This solves the secondary SPACE problem for your set of DLIBs.
How about the small directory block allocation problem?  Answer:  The
free PDS command (or the vendor product STARTOOL) contains a subcommand
to expand the number of directory blocks in a partitioned dataset,
without reallocating the dataset.  The format of this PDS subcommand is:

   FIXPDS EXPANDDIR(nn)

where nn is the number of additional directory blocks desired.  The
command works by figuring out if there are any members located at the
beginning data area of the dataset, past the directory area.  Then a
question is asked:  If the dataset would contain nn additional
directory blocks, which members' data would get overlaid?  These
members are then moved to the end of the dataset.  Finally, this area
at the beginning of the data area, is reformatted as the additional
directory blocks.  Neat.  Additionally, the PDS command does not have
to be run authorized.  Thus, you can run a TSO-in-batch job to invoke
the PDS command as follows:

    PDS 'dataset.name1'
    FIXPDS EXPANDDIR(mm)
    CHANGE 'dataset.name2'
    FIXPDS EXPANDDIR(nn)

and so on for all your DLIBs will small directory allocations.

      We've run out of space here.  But I hope I've stimulated your
ingenuity to create some innovative batch jobs.  If your installation
will run smoother, and your work will take less time, we've accomplished
something.  Good luck.  See you next month.


  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 1.   Layout of a TSO-in-Batch Job.  Note that the actual TSO
            commands to be executed, are placed in a list in the
            SYSTSIN ddname.  Only TSO commands which put out their
            output using the PUTLINE interface (and not the TPUT
            interface) will show output under TSO-in-Batch.  Standard
            IBM-supplied commands usually use the PUTLINE interface,
            but not always.



//TBATJOB JOB (insert your job card information here)
//STEP01  EXEC PGM=IKJEFT01,REGION=4096K,DYNAMNBR=50
//STEPLIB  DD DISP=SHR,DSN=your.steplib.name    (authorized if needed)
//SYSPRINT DD SYSOUT=*
//SYSTSPRT DD SYSOUT=*
//SYSTERM  DD SYSOUT=*
//SYSTSIN  DD *
 LISTC LEV(SYS1) ALL
 LISTC LEV(SYS2) ALL
/*


