                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          May 1998

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  Sam can be reached at
sbgolob@aol.com or sbgolob@attglobal.net.  Documentation about the CBT MVS
Tapes can be found on the web, at  http://members.aol.com/cbttape


UNDELETING DATA - PART 1

      Most of us have come across a situation in which we accidentally
deleted a pds member or a dataset.  What does an application programmer
do under the circumstance?  Call systems programming!  They're the
experts, and they'll restore the dataset from a backup (or they'll do
some "magic").  What do we do when it happens to us?  Usually, we can
do the same thing, except that we'll do it ourselves.  But what if there
aren't any backups for some reason?  Do we have any recourse then?

      Of course, this supposedly should never happen.  We are the
guardians of our installation's data.  And we should administer the
installation in such a way that there are many barriers between normalcy
and disaster.  If one thing goes wrong, then there is a contingency
plan.  If that contingency plan fails, then there's a second plan
right behind it.  And ideally, these contingency plans should be nested
many levels deep, so that except under the most dire of circumstances,
our shop can always recover from a mistake.

      However, we and our management are fully responsible for setting
up these plans and procedures in the first place.  And it pays for us
to become as knowledgeable as possible in recovery techniques.  You may
never know in advance when you'll need a technique, or when you have to
have some recovery tool in place, ready for action.

      Today, we'll talk about some techniques that are usually in the
category of "last resorts", but they don't have to be.  Let's consider
the idea of "undeleting", or restoring some data that was deleted by
the operating system.  Undeleting a pds member can often be done in a
jiffy, with the right tools.  Undeleting an entire dataset is a
completely different matter.  It is usually very difficult to do, and
to me it seems almost impossible to automate, because to undelete a
dataset, you have to restore data that normally isn't saved.  We'll
discuss the topic of undeleting datasets, mostly in the next column.
This month, we'll deal with general principles, and restoring deleted
partitioned dataset members.


SOME PRINCIPLES BEHIND UNDELETING

      Once you've gotten rid of some disk data on your system, it's
gone, right?  Not necessarily.  Sometimes the data itself still exists
on disk, but only the pointers to the data were deleted.  This happens
when you delete a partitioned dataset member, or when you delete a disk
dataset.  Under many circumstances, the data is still there.  Only the
pointers to the data have been wiped out.  Theoretically, if you can
restore the pointers to the data that is still there, you can restore
actual access to the data.  This is the concept of undeleting data.

      Let's go deeper into this, and ask the question:  "How does the
system find data on disk?"  I'll answer this question in a general way.
Once the system knows that the data is on a certain volume, usually
from looking at the catalog, or if the user has specified the
particular volume serial, then the system goes to the volume id record
on track 0, record 3 of that volume.  Record 3 contains the volume id,
and the exact CCHHR (cylinder, head, and record) location of the header
record (Format 4 DSCB) of the VTOC, or Volume Table of Contents for
that volume.  The VTOC contains records which point to the individual
datasets.  If the desired dataset happens to be a partitioned dataset,
then the beginning of its data consists of another set of pointers, the
pds directory.  The pds directory contains the names of all the dataset
members.

      Each pds directory entry minimally contains the member name and
the TTR location (relative track and record location from the beginning
of the dataset) of the beginning of that member.  The directory entry
may contain more data:  SSI information, ISPF stats for source-type
members, or load module attribute information.  In any case, a dataset,
or a member of a partitioned dataset, can be exactly located on the
disk volume.  Practically speaking, it is far easier to restore a
deleted pds directory entry for a member, than to restore all of the
VTOC records necessary to "undelete" an entire dataset.

      Now let's talk about "data integrity".  What keeps the system
from constantly overwriting valuable data that's on disk?  Once data
is written on a disk volume, its space locations, which are the disk
extents, are marked as occupied, or "allocated".  A new allocation of
space will not reuse any space that's occupied--only space that's
marked as "free".  For performance reasons, if you think about it,
it's obvious that the dataset allocation component of the system
should only be required to search for free space, and not have to sift
through all the space on the pack that's occupied, before deciding
where to put the new dataset.  A new dataset should only go to free
space, obviously.  Therefore, the disk's VTOC system should have a
quick way of finding its free space locations directly, without first
sifting through the occupied space.

     There's an old way and a new way of finding free space on a disk.
The old way was from VTOC records directly.  The new way uses another
system dataset on the volume, known as the VTOC INDEX dataset.  When
you initialize a volume with IBM's utility ICKDSF, you optionally
specify if you want the volume to be "indexed", and to have, and use
a VTOC INDEX dataset.  Once the index dataset is created, it doesn't
have to be used.  Using the ICKDSF "OSVTOC" option, you can run a job
to turn the use of the VTOC INDEX dataset off.  Using the ICKDSF
"IXVTOC" option, you can run another job to toggle the use of the VTOC
INDEX dataset back on again.  SMS-managed volumes are required to be
indexed, while they are being managed.

      If the VTOC INDEX is not being used for a volume, then free space
is determined by a chain of Format 5 VTOC records, known as free space
records on the VTOC.  If the VTOC INDEX is being used, then the index
dataset maintains the current status of free disk extents on the pack.
It's now obvious that whenever a new dataset gets allocated, its disk
extents have to be removed from the pool of free disk extents on the
volume.  Conversely, when a dataset gets deleted, the VTOC system
returns its extents back to the pool of free disk extents.  This fact
is very important for us.  If you want to undelete a disk dataset, you
have to ensure that no one else will write over the data areas where
the dataset had been.

      Before I drop this topic for now, and go to the easier task of
restoring deleted partitioned dataset members (as opposed to restoring
entire datasets), I have to mention the topic of VTOC consistency.  It
makes sense not to mark a disk extent in the VTOC as both being occupied
and being free at the same time.  But as we described, the VTOC system
keeps separate records of occupied space, and free space.  What if there
is some kind of damage, caused by a system crash, when the allocated
extents and the free extents have gone out of sync?  Where's the system
safety net to guard against this?

      To keep matters simple, I'll discuss the OSVTOC case, in which
the VTOC INDEX dataset is not being used.  In that case, all free space
records are kept in a chain of Format 5 DSCB records in the VTOC
itself.  During any dataset allocation or deletion on the pack, there
is a bit in the (Format 4) VTOC header, known as the DIRF bit, which is
turned on.  During the time when the DIRF bit is turned on, the system
assumes that there are inconsistencies among the VTOC records.  At the
end of the allocation or deletion, after both "occupied" and "free"
extent descriptions on the VTOC are adjusted to consistency, the DIRF
bit in the VTOC header is turned off.  The VTOC records are now
assumed to be consistent, between occupied space and free space.

      Now what if a system crash occurs during a dataset allocation?
When the system comes back up, and you try and allocate a new dataset
on the troubled volume, an allocation routine checks the DIRF bit
first, and sees that it's on.  Allocation then calls a system program,
known as the VTOC CONVERT ROUTINE, which goes through the entire VTOC,
and makes sure that the Format 5 free space records are properly
consistent with the extents already marked as allocated, before
allowing any new allocations to take place.  During that time, you'll
see a console message:  "VTOC CONVERT ROUTINE ENTERED, REASON DIRF".
This safeguard ensures that new datasets will not be placed on top of
current data, after a crash.

      We've now discussed how data is located on disk, and how disk
space is marked as either "allocated" or "free".  The rest of our
discussion will consist of two parts:  undeleting pds members by
restoring deleted pds directory entries, and undeleting entire datasets
by reconstructing deleted VTOC entries.  Since the latter topic is very
difficult, we'll leave most of it for next month.


UNDELETING PDS MEMBERS

      In truth, a partitioned dataset, or pds, is a sequential type
dataset that has been modified to look like it is a collection of many
datasets.  Understanding that a partitioned dataset is "sort of
sequential" is a key concept to know, when locating or restoring data
in a pds.  A good way to get a picture of a pds, is to think that the
data is stored sequentially, but it is located and kept track of, by a
kind of direct access.  The component of the pds which tracks the
individual files, or members, is known as the pds directory.  I have
written a 3-part series about the details of pds directory structure
in my September thru November 1991 columns of this magazine.  These
can be obtained from File 120 of the CBT MVS Tape, which is included
on the NaSPA cd-rom disk.

      All new data written to a pds, is written after the end of the
existing data.  For example, if you are editing some source-type data
such as JCL or program source code, and you save the data, the data
for the entire member is copied to a space after the end of all the
other data in the dataset.  After the new data is written, a pds
directory entry is either created, for a new member, or modified to
point to the new data, for a preexisting member.  In the case of an
old pds member that was modified, after all of its data was copied to
the end of the pds, its old data remains in place, not pointed to by
any directory entry.  Therefore the old data occupies "dead space" in
the pds.  The dead space is not recovered until a dataset "compress"
is done, usually using the IEBCOPY program.  "Undeleting" a pds member
consists of re-creating a new pds directory entry to point to the
previous dead space, left by a deleted member.

      The pds directory is physically located at the beginning of the
first dataset extent, and it almost always has a different DCB
description than the data itself.  Assembler programs which access a
partitioned dataset's directory, as well as the data, have to have two
different DCB's defined--one for the directory, and one for the data
that is in the members.

      In restoring deleted pds members, we'll bear in mind that there
are enough automated or semi-automated tools for the job, so that we
won't have to directly zap a pds directory to do the restore.  Some
knowledge of actual directory structure will only be required if ISPF
statistics, load module attributes, or SSI information will have to be
adjusted in the restored member's directory entry, and we also have
tools for that.  Available utilities which use the STOW macro to make
a new directory entry that points to the deleted data, are quite
plentiful.  Our job will consist of learning how to use these tools.
This is the main reason why undeleting a pds member is so much more
simple than undeleting an entire dataset.  In undeleting an entire
dataset, there are almost no available automated tools.

      What are some pds member undeletion tools, and how can we get
them?  One of the most powerful tools is the free "PDS" TSO command
processor, which can be found on File 182 of the CBT MVS Utilities
Tape, a huge independently produced collection of system programmer
utilities that can be obtained (among other places) through the NaSPA
office.  Another, very different tool, is the FIXPDS program from
File 036 of the CBT Tape.  A third tool is the PDSGAS batch program
from File 316 of the CBT Tape.  The CBT Tape also has other programs
for this purpose, scattered throughout its files.

      The easiest tool to use, in my opinion, but not the best, is
the program called PDSGAS.  PDSGAS is a batch program.  All it does
is to scan the data part of a partitioned dataset from the beginning.
If any data is found, that doesn't have a directory entry pointing to
it, PDSGAS creates members named $$000001, $$000002, and so forth, to
point to the data in these "dead spaces".  If those names already
exist, PDSGAS changes the new names slightly.  PDSGAS can do a
minimal restore for source-type partitioned datasets only.  No ISPF
statistics or SSI values are created for the newly made members.
PDSGAS also can't recreate the special directory entries necessary to
point to load module pds members.

      The next tool to learn about is the free PDS command processor,
now at Version 8.5, from File 182 of the CBT Tape.  PDS is an extremely
versatile program package.  There is a vendor-supported version of PDS
called STARTOOL (from SERENA Inc.) that is far better than the free
version, but for this job, either product will do.  When restoring
deleted pds members, the PDS product is extremely smart.  PDS can tell
the difference between source-type members and load modules, and it can
supply ISPF statistics for the source-type members that it restores.
For load modules, once they are restored using PDS's "RESTORE"
subcommand, the load module attributes, such as reentrancy, APF
authorized, special entry points, etc. can be readjusted using PDS's
"ATTRIBUTE" and "ALIAS" subcommands.  The PDS command statements
necessary to get a similar (but much more intelligent) result to PDSGAS,
are:   RESTORE $$ REPEAT NOPROMPT     The PDS package has an extensive
HELP member, and you can find out many more details there.

      Finally, a completely different tool for pds member restoration
can be found on File 036 of the CBT Tape, and is known as FIXPDS.
Instead of starting its scan for deleted member data at the beginning
of the partitioned dataset, FIXPDS starts at the end of the extents
for the dataset, and goes backwards.  Each piece of "dead space" found
by FIXPDS is ISPF-browsed for the user, and the user is given the
opportunity to decide whether or not to stow a new member name for that
data.  FIXPDS ends, when it encounters the beginning of the pds.

      Using FIXPDS can sometimes be a little tricky, especially if a
source-type pds was written over a previous load module library.
Since FIXPDS does an ISPF browse, it uses the source dataset's DCB
information such as its LRECL and BLKSIZE.  When it goes to the end of
the extents, and sees old load modules which are now dead space, it
usually can't browse them, because their blocks are too big.
Therefore, to use FIXPDS on a dataset like that, you sometimes have to
temporarily alter (with a tool like CDSCB from File 300 of the CBT
Tape) its DCB information to LRECL=0, BLKSIZE=32760, RECFM=U, look at
the "far out" data, stow what member names you want, and then change
the DCB information back to what it was.  This is tedious to do, and
for member restores in general, I'd say that the PDS package is the
best tool to use.

      Well, I hope this session was instructive!  Next month, I'll
try and unravel the tricky concepts behind restoring entire deleted
datasets.  Good luck.  We'll see you then.

