                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          April 1998

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  Sam can be reached at
sbgolob@aol.com or sbgolob@attglobal.net.


OTHER PEOPLE'S PROBLEMS

      Did you ever wonder how it's possible to keep up with the MVS
field, especially now that it's OS/390 too?  This problem is indeed
compounded if you happen to be a systems programmer in a backleveled
shop--say a place that runs MVS/XA 2.2.3, or MVS/370, or some system
like that.  Do places like that still exist today?  You bet they do,
although Y2K may do something to eliminate them soon.  Even if you
work at a very modern shop, on a very modern system, the field is
moving fast, making it a requirement for all of us to learn things
continually.

      Nobody knows everything, and everybody is limited by finite
intelligence (even if they have a lot of it) and finite time.  Nobody
can get more done than they actually can.  It follows, first, that
people have to work together with each other, and second, that a smart
person should realize that it's good to take advantage of other
people's experience, because you don't have enough time to re-invent
all the wheels in the world.  (It's also counter-productive.)  When
sharing experiences with people, it's a good idea to have a balance
between helping others and getting helped by them.  Everyone has a
pleasant experience when the sharing goes two ways.

      Getting back to the problem of keeping up with MVS, I've
discovered some helpful advice--find out about other people's problems!
I know a fellow who worked for many years at a shop which had
back-leveled system software.  Besides budgetary constraints and
having to fend off numerous attempts to outsource the computer
operation, this place had to run a computer that wasn't ESA-capable.
The systems programmers were faced with not being able to acquire
experience with modern equipment.  How can one lessen the isolation
that this causes?  This fellow did it by not being isolated.  Those
were the days before the Internet; he used to call other systems
programmers in other shops constantly.  He used to try and attend
SHARE and other user group meetings.  He constantly asked his friends
about the problems they were having, and he shared his problems with
them--often they were able to help him out of some sticky jams--those
were the days of the "untrained IBM-SEs", and before IBMlink.

      It helped that this fellow was an extrovert, and he didn't have
any trouble talking to people.  Nowadays, there's hope for everyone.
With the advent of a more electronic age, everyone can participate in
this process.


PROBLEM EXCHANGING FOR INTROVERTS TOO

      I'm quite new to the Internet.  My previous shops didn't give us
Internet access, but nowadays you can also buy your own access for not
too much money, or for none at all.  The Internet has Newsgroup lists,
where you exchange your problems by writing, or just listening, and you
don't have to talk to anybody directly.  One of the principal lists is
called IBM-MAIN, out of the University of Alabama.  IBM-MAIN is an
ideal vehicle for exchanging problems among MVS systems programmers,
but it has to be managed, in order to be fully useful.  There are many
other lists too, which run the same way.  They're a lot of fun, once
you get into it.

      IBM-MAIN is the largest list I know of.  It is a closed list,
meaning that you have to subscribe in order to send email messages to
it.  Anyone who sends a message to the list, gets the message circulated
to all the subscribers.  Once you subscribe to the IBM-MAIN list, your
email could be bombarded with about 40 to 60 messages a day.  How do
you handle that?  There's an option on LISTSERV, which is the software
that manages most of these lists, called DIGEST.  Instead of getting
individual messages, you get a DIGEST of all that day's messages, every
midnight.  This DIGEST is only one file, and it doesn't overwhelm your
Internet email.  I save the digest as a file every day, and browse it
at my leisure with SPF/PC.  With DIGEST, I can't answer all the messages
from the list on a real-time basis, but I save my sanity.  I answer the
messages a day later.

      IBM-MAIN is serviced by software called a LISTSERV server, and
many other newsgroup lists use this same software too.  Once you learn
to use the LISTSERV software, you can comfortably manage many newsgroup
lists, and correspond with the people who send email through them.  The
various newsgroup lists keep tabs on other lists, using the LISTSERV
software capabilites.  For example, once you subscribe to IBM-MAIN, you
can ask its list server to send you a list of other newsgroup lists,
and you can even ask it to attempt to subscribe to those lists for you.

      We have to get started by subscribing to IBM-MAIN, for example.
From your email address, you send a message to LISTSERV@BAMA.UA.EDU,
with message text: subscribe ibm-main (optionally followed by your
actual name).  The message will be handled by computer.  "Subscribe"
is a keyword that the LISTSERV software reads.  The computer will send
you back a message with a code.  You merely have to reply to the
computer's message, with a message that says one word:  ok.  Or you
can say ok, followed by the code number they send you.  The list server
will then send you a message that you are subscribed to the list, and
your email id will start getting bombarded with the email messages
that everyone sends in.  Once you are subscribed, you can send mail
into the IBM-MAIN list yourself (and everyone will get a copy).  The
email address you use is IBM-MAIN@BAMA.UA.EDU.  This is different
from the LISTSERV address.  When you want to broadcast mail, you must
use the IBM-MAIN address.  When you want to talk to the computer itself,
you use the LISTSERV address.

      The IBM-MAIN list has lots of messages per day, usually.  Most
other lists have less activity.  To stem the big tide of email messages,
you can talk to the list server to customize your subscription.  A big
list of commands to use, can be obtained by getting a LISTSERV reference
card.  Simply email the LISTSERV address of the list, with the message:
LISTSERV REFCARD and the computer will email a reference card of
commands, back to you.  The next thing I do, to customize my session, is
to send the list server a list of SET commands, to customize my session.
The ones I used for the ibm-main list are:

      set ibm-main repro     (to get a copy of my own messages)
      set ibm-main ack       (to get an acknowledgement that my own
                               message was sent out)
      set ibm-main digest    (to condense all the incoming messages
                               for each day, into one email, instead
                               of many emails)

With the LISTSERV reference card, and a little practice, you can get
your subscription parameters the way you want them.  A good piece of
advice is to save the email containing the reference card, as a file.
Then you can print it out, and constantly refer back to it.


NETIQUETTE AND BENEFITS

      Once you have the privilege of being subscribed to a list, don't
abuse it.  It's better to keep your messages useful to the public, and
not to waste their time.  Everyone else has to manage all the messages
that come in.  Ask yourself the question:  "Am I contributing to the
general store of knowledge, or to the general garbage can?"  I think
that if you look at the other people's messages for a while before you
yourself send any, you'll get the general idea how it goes.  Try not
to attach any big files to your messages--I made that mistake once, and
only once.  These files burden the list server (which has to duplicate
the file possibly 1100 times) and also fill the subscribers' mailboxes
unnecessarily.  Don't use the list to advertise your own commercial
services or software, except to mention that it may solve a certain
subscriber's problem.  Solving people's problems is permitted;
commercial advertising for its own sake, isn't.

      Now that we've talked about the preparations, let's start talking
about the results.  Once you've started looking at the other people's
messages, you'll start learning.  A good rule of thumb for me has always
been to look carefully at the things I know about, and to also read the
things I don't know about.  Reading the things I don't know about is
needed for expanding my horizons.  If someone writes about a piece of
equipment or software that my shop doesn't have, or that I don't have
previous experience with, here's a way to get some cheap experience.
Then, if I see that equipment or software somewhere else, or my shop
acquires it later, I already know something about it.  Some information
about this stuff is already in my general store of knowledge.

      What if I myself have a problem?  I can send an email to the
public, and see if someone will send me a solution.  It's an effective
way to go oftentimes.  Of course, the process depends on the willingness
of the participants to take the time and help other people.  But that's
the joy of it--the give and take!  I get a tremendous amount of
satisfaction if I help someone else out of a jam.  And I in turn, have
been similarly helped numerous times by others.  There's a big pool of
knowledge out there!

      Occasionally, the news group has helped me find out about a user
group I'd lost track of.  I'm on the East Coast, and I wanted to know
what how the Los Angeles MVS Users Group was doing?  After one or two
request emails to the news group, I got several replies with phone
numbers and addresses of relevant people.  Anything related to improving
our ability to do our jobs, is fair game for discussion.  The talk can
get quite peripheral, but most often, it's very specific and to the
point.

      Once in a while, we can also poke fun at a certain vendor's
annoying practices.  Besides the laugh we get from the "inside jokes",
we can glean practical advice about how to circumvent that vendor's
efforts, whatever they might be.


GETTING ADDICTED

      Once you've gotten yourself accustomed to listening to other
people's problems, the benefits will start accruing.  You'll be better
informed about the MVS (OS/390) field in general.  After all, you've
been listening to the news!  When your own shop gets new equipment,
you'll have a "leg up" on how it works, and you can ask the group any
questions you have about it; they'll tell you their war stories.  You'll
be aware of what your peers are interested in, and concerned about.  You
won't remain isolated in your own shop any more.

      Of course, your shop will benefit when you're better able to do
your job.  But you will benefit too.  I have my 50-50, 100-100 rule.
It goes like this:  "When you do a task well, you split it 50-50 with
your employer--both of you get benefit.  They get the job done, and
you get the experience.  But it's really not a split, it's 100
percent for both.  They get 100 percent of the job, and you get 100
percent of the experience.  That's something that nobody can take
away from you!"  I like this rule, and I live by it.

      Talking on the news groups gets to be so much fun after a while,
that I find I have to limit myself to a certain amount of time each
day.  Like any addiction, even a "good addiction" needs a limit.  You
too, can experience this fun, if you aren't doing it already.

      However, after you're addicted, you'll know that life with
others is better than life by yourself.  And it's practical also.
Good luck.  See you next month.


