                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         December 1998

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@aol.com or sbgolob@attglobal.net.
Documentation about the CBT MVS Tapes can be found on the web, at
http://members.aol.com/cbttape .  The free PDS package can be obtained
online, at http://members.aol.com/freepds .


SETTING YOURSELF UP

      Every experienced systems programmer wants to have as many tools
available as possible, ready to use.  If you've been at the same shop
for a long time, you've probably already set yourself up with special
programs and gadgets (the kind of things we talk about in this column)
so you'll be able to do your work more quickly and easily.  The whole
"kit and caboodle" of your favorite tools has been installed, tested,
and is accessible to your userid, ready to be deployed at an instant's
notice.  However, if you're new to a shop, or you're a consultant who
has to travel often from one shop to another, setting yourself up with
an appropriate set of tools can be a chore.  For a long while, you
might feel yourself handicapped because you can't use the wonderful
work-saving tools you're familiar with.

      Today we'll say a few things about how to set yourself up
quickly.  I have my own experiences in doing this, and I'd appreciate
if the readers would email me and tell me some of their experiences
too.  My teacher Jeff Broido has been a consultant ever since I've
known him, and his clever inventions enable him to set himself up
anywhere, at any shop, within one to several days.

      There are several considerations that come in.  You, as a
"system doctor", need to do more privileged things than the average
user.  Most times, the shop will give you a "system programmer's id",
which is a TSO userid that already has what they deem to be enough
extra privileges built in, so you can do your special job.  Other
times, a shop will not "trust" a consultant, and they might even
handicap him (or her) by giving out a userid that has little more than
an application programmer's power.  Then they'll expect the consultant
to do the "system doctor's job" just the same.  Consultants often have
to deal with such politics, under such conditions, and sometimes it's
better to be able to do your job, quietly and efficiently, without
butting heads with management more than necessary.

      In doing the process of "setting yourself up", there are various
things in your TSO environment that you'll have to alter.  Since you're
special, you'll want to change the average TSO user's parameters as
little as possible--preferably not at all.  For example, you'll want to
avoid public PARMLIB changes if you can.  There are a few shops that
require several "manager signoffs" to change just one PARMLIB member.
Often, if you know some tricks, you can quietly achieve the same result
for yourself (on your own userid) as if you changed something in
PARMLIB, but you don't have to do it "for the public".  To me, this way
is greatly preferred.

      So let's see what we need to do, under various degrees of
"management restraint".  I can't say that I have the final word on the
subject.  I don't know everything--that's why I want your email input.
But we'll talk about the subject in general, and I'll discuss some
pointers here and there.  There are really really two divisions to this
subject.  Number one is:  "How do you set up your own TSO environment",
and number two is:  "What do you take with you and how do you package
it?"

      Finally, no discussion of MVS tools is complete, without mention
of the wonderful world of free MVS tools and utilities.  The granddaddy
of free tool collections is the "CBT MVS Utilities Tape", together with
the "CBT Overflow Tape".  The CBT Tapes are independently produced, and
are not subject to the restrictions of any organization.  Some of the
tools found there have no equal, even among vendor products.  I write a
lot about materials from the CBT Tapes in this column, because they are
free, and any shop can use the tools.

      Where can you get the CBT Tape materials?  NaSPA incorporates a
version of both CBT Tapes into its cd-rom collection, which is
distributed annually.  The CBT tape itself is updated more frequently,
nowadays it's every few months, but it can be more often.  For a long
time, NaSPA has played a giant role in the distribution of the CBT Tape
materials on tape and cd-rom.  Now, NaSPA is also sponsoring a web site
which has all the latest CBT materials downloadable, ready to be
supplied when needed, on instant notice.  I prefer to have all sources
available.  I can take a cd-rom or a tape wherever I go.  They're
portable.  I don't need Internet access to use them.  The cd-rom and
tapes don't require lengthy downloads.  The cd-rom source files are
readable in ASCII, on a pc.  The tapes and the web site materials are
in EBCDIC.  On the web site, the files are pkzip'ed and in TSO XMIT
format.  You upload a file to the MVS system after unzipping it, and
you do a TSO RECEIVE on it, so it's completely MVS-ready.  Each medium
has its own advantages, and it's nice to have them all.  The
NaSPA-sponsored web site is at http://www.cbttape.org .


MODIFYING YOUR TSO ENVIRONMENT.

      Now we'll get started on the subject.  I'd say that one
thing you should ask for, when going to a new shop, is the ability
to use your own logon procedure in a system PROCLIB.  If you can do
that, and you have update access to an authorized load library, you're
in full business.  Copy the normal systems programmer logon procedure
to your own named one.  Check carefully what's already in the
authorized library, and if you don't see anything there that might
interfere with your TSO session, add it as a STEPLIB ddname, with
DISP=SHR of course, to your own logon procedure.  You've got to be
very careful who else uses the authorized library.  You shouldn't put
anything else in there that would mess someone's work up.  It's best
if you have your own systems programmer authorized library, so you
stay out of everyone's way.

      The IKJTABLS load module will completely override the IKJTSOxx
parameters in PARMLIB if its load library is known to a TSO session as
an authorized STEPLIB.  Remember that even if this authorized library
is used as an ISPLLIB by other people, the overriding of IKJTSOxx in
PARMLIB will not occur for them.  Authorization under STEPLIB will be
ruined if there is a non-authorized library in the STEPLIB
concatenation, so be careful that all the libraries in the STEPLIB of
your logon proc, are authorized, and omit the ones that aren't.  If
ISPF is involved in your work, consider whether the deleted libraries
could be included in your ISPLLIB concatenation.

      I'm a big believer in removing as much JCL (that is, DDNAMEs)
from the logon proc as possible, and instead, allocate your files
via the initial logon CLIST or REXX exec.  If one of the datasets is
gone from the system, if it's inaccessible or it was renamed, you can
still have a TSO session, and you can make a different CLIST to
recover and get to work.  If the dataset that disappeared was part of
your logon proc JCL, your TSO session will fail on a JCL error, and
you won't have a session at all.  It's much safer to get your files
via the TSO ALLOC command rather than with logon proc JCL.  So get a
sample logon CLIST ready for insertion into your SYSPROC concatenation
under TSO.  When you go to a new shop, just change the dataset names.

      My teacher Jeff Broido carries a tape with him, containing all
the personal libraries with his own stuff.  After he loads these
down to pds'es on a new system, he customizes his TSO allocation
CLIST to put them into his TSO session in the right places:  ISPPLIB,
SYSPROC, ISPLLIB, ISPMLIB, and so forth.  It doesn't take too long.

      Jeff doesn't like to use his personal programs if he hasn't
assembled them at the new shop.  For this purpose, he wrote a CLIST he
calls %A, which assembles a program from one of his source libraries in
the foreground, under TSO.  If the program isn't extremely long, the
SYSTERM result comes back to his terminal in a relatively short time.
In a couple of minutes, Jeff can reassemble and re-linkedit quite a few
of the programs he relies upon for his daily work.  This procedure
saves a lot of time when he's setting up.


SETTING UP YOUR OWN ISPF COMMAND TABLE ENTRIES

      Your own personal ISPF command table entries can make life much
easier.  If you make a personal version of the system ISPF command
tables, especially the ISPTABL, or ISRTABL members, depending on how
your shop is set up already, you can save yourself a lot of work
later.  Among other additions to the normally supplied table entries,
I like to set up a way to instantly get any standard IBM ISPF panel
whenever I want it.  For example, I'll pick a little-used command
prefix, say SP.  Then, if I want an instant ISPF 3.1 screen, on top of
anything I'm doing--say I'm in the middle of editing a file--I just
enter SP31 on the command line, and the ISPF 3.1 screen pops up on top
of my edit.  I'll use the ISPF 3.1 screen to do what I want, and then
I'll end it, and go back to editing my file.  I like to set these up
for all of the standard ISPF functions.  How can we go about doing
that?

      There are two table library DDNAMEs in your ISPF dataset
concatenation.  The ISPTLIB concatenation contains ISPF tables which
are read-only.  Your ISPF session will recognize these and use them.
The updates to tables are done in a pds which is in the ISPTABL DDNAME
concatenation.  If you want to update a table, using ISPF 3.9, your
table must be a member in a library that is allocated to the DDNAME
of ISPTABL.  Suppose you want to update the system member ISPTABL
which everyone uses.  You want to add command table entries to it,
that only you want to have.  What do you do?  You shouldn't or
(depending on the version of ISPF you have) can't edit the system
ISPTABL or ISRTABL member directly.  You can make a copy of the
system ISPTABL member, for example, into your own table library pds,
and call it some non-system name, ending in ..TABL, such as XSPTABL.
Then you do ALLOC FILE(ISPTABL) DA(your.table.dataset) SH REUSE, and
afterwards get into ISPF 3.9.  When the screen asks you which table you
want to edit, you say XSP.  The system will supply the suffix of ..TABL
for you, and you'll be able to see the system table entries, one by
one.

      Now we want to be able to specify special commands to invoke
standard IBM ISPF screens, as we said before.  With ISPF 3.9, editing
XSP on one split, invoke the main menu on the other split, and enter
the PANELID command on the command line of the second split.  You'll
instantly see the member name of the displayed ISPF panel at the upper
left corner of the second split screen.  Go browse the panel library
where this member is contained, and look at the member.  You'll see,
toward the bottom of the member, all of the SELECT statements which
invoke the different ISPF functions.  Then you copy them as additional
entries to the XSPTABL command table, on the ISPF 3.9 screen that's
in the first split of your session.  For example, to add a command
called SP0, which invokes the ISPF 0 screen, look at the select
statement of the ISR@PRIM panel (or whatever the name of the main
panel is at your site), which specifies the command "0".  Copy the
name SP0 into a new line of your ISPF 3.9 split, specify 0 characters
so the command can't be abbreviated, and then copy the SELECT
parameters exactly from the ISR@PRIM panel into the ISPF 3.9 screen,
except for the enclosing quotes.  Do the same for all the other
ISR@PRIM screen options.  For 3.1, 3.2, etc., go look at the ISRUTIL
panel (or whatever name that PANELID specifies for ISPF 3) and get
the select statements from there, to make commands SP31, SP32, and
so forth, all the way up to SP314.

      When all the additional entries are complete, get out of ISPF 3.9
with PF3 (which automatically updates and saves the member XSPTABL).
Copy XSPTABL to your own partitioned dataset, as ISPTABL.  Then
allocate this personal table library dataset to the top of your ISPTLIB
DDNAME concatenation.  Get out of ISPF and back into ISPF.  Lo and
behold, all of your new table entries will be usable.

      If you don't want to go to all of this trouble every time you
change shops, Gilbert Saint-flour might have just the solution for you,
on File 183 of the CBT MVS Tape, which contains a lot of his programs.
The program we can use is called FASTPATH.  Gilbert made the FASTPATH
program, which need not be authorized, to do all of the setups
necessary to customize most of his own ISPF session to his own taste.
Your requirements may be different, so you can go into the source code
for FASTPATH, customize it to your own needs, and behold!  You'll have
your own customized ISPF session initializer.

      Before ending, I'd like to mention one of Gilbert's other
programs from File 183 of the CBT Tape.  This program is called
SHOWMVS, and it's a system programmer's (and EDP auditor's) dream.
With just one invocation of the SHOWMVS load module as a TSO command,
you'll get so much information about your system and your own TSO
session, that you probably won't need much more.  There's a load
module for SHOWMVS on File 135 of the CBT Tape, and you can pop it
into one of your ISPLLIB libraries and try it.  If you haven't seen
it yet (or even if you have), you'll be amazed at how it's been
improved.  SHOWMVS will be able to show you so much about your
system and your TSO session, as it currently is, that when you walk
into a new shop, it'll be just that much easier to further customize
your session and set yourself up.  Good luck.  See you next month.

