                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          March 1998

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  Sam can be reached at
sbgolob@aol.com or sbgolob@attglobal.net.


ASSORTED UTILITIES - PART 2

      Anyone who has been in the IBM mainframe Systems Programming
field for a long time, will have noticed some unmistakable trends
that are not very apparent to newer systems programmers.  First and
foremost, is that great skill in assembler programming is apparently
"no longer required".  This is not to say that skill in assembler
programming is no longer valuable--there's nothing farther from the
truth than that.  An understanding of the inner workings of the
system is worth it's weight in Platinum.  Rather, the situation
presents itself to us in the form of a statement:  "They don't grow
'em nowadays like they used to!"  In other words, newer systems
programmers don't tend to be anywhere nearly as skilled in the
nitty-gritty of assembler instructions and system control blocks, as
the old-timers were.

      Having broken into the field a bit more recently, I asked my
friend Rick Fochtman why this was.  He told me that in the OS/360
days, in the late '60s and early '70s, there were few convenient exit
points and system facilities for getting performance information, or
for doing anything else you wanted.  These were also the days before
PL/S coding.  The only way you could make the system do something it
didn't do, was to look into the system source code, or disassemble
system object code, and code the modification yourself in assembler
language.  You literally had to have the same skills as the IBM code
developers.

      Very often, in those times, the programmer didn't have access
to the layout of the IBM control blocks.  In many cases, the control
block layouts were in the private macro libraries, and not everyone
could get to see them.  So a systems programmer making a modification
to an IBM module, literally had to look in the module, figure out how
the control block got loaded or referenced, and deduce the layout
without further help.  All the IBM coding was done in pure assembler
language then, and someone who coded a modification would acquire a
very large understanding of the workings of the original module(s),
without outside help.  This was a "very good school" for learning.
Later systems programmers, who didn't have the opportunity to go to
this "school", by-and-large didn't become as skilled as the "older"
people.

      One step later, in my time, things were very different.  By then,
IBM had provided some official "exit points", where you could put in
user code to modify parts of the system.  Also, large numbers of
pre-existing modifications to the system were, at that time, already
available, having been coded by the old-timers.  These could be merely
re-fitted to the later versions of the operating system modules--they
didn't have to be researched and coded from scratch.  The MVS
operating system was, by now, more mature.  A lot more frills and
tools had already been added.  Large collections of user-written code,
such as the CBT MVS Tape and other available sources of free code,
were now readily accessible to practitioners of the field.
Modification, as opposed to coding from scratch, became more the rule
of the day.

      This situation led to the newer systems programmers being less
skilled in assembler programming than their earlier counterparts.
The "school" wasn't as good.  It's even worse nowadays, with the
"vendorization" of a lot of system tools.  It might seem that today's
systems programmers don't have to code anything.  The vendors do it
all for them.  There's hardly any "school" at all, at least for
coding's sake.  To that, I'll answer one statement:  We systems
programmers each have to "make our own school".

      We have help, if we know where to look for it.  One person,
Dave Alcock, who just submitted a 60000-line pds of his own code for
inclusion into the CBT Tape, told me that he learned to program in
assembler mostly from looking at other people's code on the CBT Tape.
The president of this organization, Scott Sherer, told me the exact
same thing.  And I myself can also say that I learned many of my
coding skills from looking at code on the CBT Tape.  We three are, of
course, not the only ones.  Many of our contemporaries have learned
enough to make substantial contributions to this field, just from
studying other people's earlier contributions.

      Today, I'd like to collect a small sample of such code from
various contributors to the CBT Tape.  Some of the things to be
mentioned, are from the old-timers.  But many of them are from people
like you and me, who took it upon themselves to learn assembler coding
skills by studying other people's clever creations.

      By the way, the CBT MVS Utilities Tape is a huge independently
produced collection of system software tools, which was started in
1975 by Arnold Casinghino, and which has been put through 417 versions
since then (Arnie did 321 of them).  There is also a CBT Overflow
Tape, that has much more software in addition.  These collections can
be freely duplicated, and can be obtained from various sources,
including NaSPA.  If you already have a tape, you can produce copies
of it for your system programmer friends.  There is a tape copying
program called COPYMODS on File 229 of the CBT Tape, which allows you
to make from 1 to 10 exact copies of a tape, end to end, in each
run.  A recent version of the CBT Tape is also a part of the NaSPA
cd-rom disk, which can be obtained through the NaSPA office.


AN EXAMPLE - SYS1.BRODCAST RESEARCH

      Jim Marshall, who worked at various computer installations for
the U.S. Air Force, and who is now a civilian, has pioneered the
popularization of user-written code among systems programmers.  Jim
had the opportunity of working with many genuine old-timers in this
field.  Even though Jim himself can be considered an old-timer like
the others, his contribution is far greater.  He took it upon himself
to collect other people's software creations, and to send them to the
CBT Tape, the SHARE MVS Tape (now part of the CBT Overflow Tape), and
to other tape collections.  I got my own start by looking at Jim
Marshall's software collections.  This brings us to the current topic.

      At my previous site, we administered about 11 separate MVS
systems.  Two of the older ones displayed a "SYS1.BRODCAST FULL"
message.  This was before we put in individual TSO userlog datasets,
and I needed some tools to investigate.  I didn't want to risk doing
an ACCOUNT SYNC, which would wipe out all of the messages--some of
them might be useful.  In a large service bureau, we couldn't afford
to offend any users.  Starting from an updated program called BRODSCAN
on the CBT Tape (a copy is on File 234), that was sent by Jim
Marshall, I was able to see which users had outstanding messages, but
I wasn't able to display or delete the messages.  I then fired up some
code from Tim Vanderwall that was on File 141 of the CBT Tape, which
displayed the messages for each user.  This was an improvement.  There
still remained the problem of deleting messages, so that space on the
SYS1.BRODCAST dataset could be freed.  These messages belonged to
users who had left the installation, and I couldn't LOGON to their TSO
accounts without their passwords, not being the RACF administrator.

      Jim Marshall sent me a hint.  Jim told me that the LISTBC
program from IBM, which displays and deletes mail messages to each
user when you LOGON to TSO, only finds out the userid by looking at
the PSCBUSER field in the PSCB control block.  My first try for
relieving the situation, was to zap core in my address space, alter
my PSCBUSER field to another id, run LISTBC to display and delete
the other user's messages, and zap core again to change the PSCBUSER
field back to my own id.  This worked, but of course, was awkward.
Then I wrote an authorized TSO command to do the same thing.  So
far, so good.

      Then, my boss got wind of the fact that my program dynamically
alters a TSO user's id.  He didn't like the code for such a program to
be in an accessible place in the shop, so I had to rewrite the
program.  Therefore, I had to learn more about the internals of the
SYS1.BRODCAST dataset.  To make a long story short, I was able to
write two other programs to display and delete someone else's BRODCAST
messages, using principles I learned from looking at the code in the
BRODSCAN program, and from browsing the SYS1.BRODCAST dataset with the
REVIEW program (from Bill Godfrey and Greg Price) that is on File 134
of the CBT Tape.  I also wrote several programs to display, but not
delete, any user's messages.

      Why use REVIEW, and not ISPF BROWSE to look at the SYS1.BRODCAST
dataset?  It turns out that SYS1.BRODCAST is a keyed dataset with
KEYLEN=1 and LRECL=129.  ISPF BROWSE uses QSAM, and cannot
differentiate between the key and the data, so that it only shows the
first 129 bytes, including the leading key, and it drops the last byte
of the data.  REVIEW uses BSAM, and it shows all the key and data
bytes.  You see why you need another tool?  It turns out that the last
byte in a SYS1.BRODCAST record is crucial to understanding the dataset
structure, because for a chained message record, the last 3 bytes
point to the location of the next record in the chain.  With ISPF
BROWSE, you can't see the whole pointer.  How did I find this out in
the first place?  By looking at SYS1.BRODCAST with the UCLA Fullscreen
ZAP tool (also from File 134 of the CBT Tape).  Fullscreen ZAP showed
the whole physical record, and I saw that ISPF BROWSE was dropping the
last byte of it.  All these investigations resulted in a package of
programs that I wrote to handle SYS1.BRODCAST problems.  I resubmitted
them to the CBT Tape for everyone else's benefit, and they can be
found on File 247.  See how one contribution leads to another?


SOME OTHER EXAMPLES

      Another crucial contribution, which led to other contributions,
is the dynamic allocation interface from Pat MacDonald of the
University of Manitoba.  Pat is an old-timer in the field, who has
now retired from the University.  Pat's contribution was to simplify
programming for packages which do multiple dynamic allocations.
Dynamically allocating datasets in a program, using SVC 99, is not
especially difficult to code, but the setup is lengthy, and it would
be very helpful to simplify the process.  Pat MacDonald's package
for doing this, which can be found on Files 089 and 090 of the CBT
Tape, has been employed by many other programs on the tape, notably
the ARCHIVER package from Rick Fochtman, which is found on File 147.

      Rick Fochtman's ARCHIVER package is unlike any that I have ever
seen, or even heard of.  I don't even think there is a vendor product
which does what the ARCHIVER does.  The ARCHIVER will take any normal
non-VSAM system programmer data:  source modules in pds or sequential
form, load modules, PSF objects, or whatever, and load it into ONE
archive, which is a VSAM dataset, in highly compressed form.  You can
fully recover the data, or pds, member by member, from the VSAM
archive.  Furthermore, the ARCHIVER has a facility to dump the
"members" of the archive into a tape dataset, and you can recover all
the members from the tape as well.  The main difference between the
VSAM archive and the tape archive, is that you can add or delete
members with the VSAM archive, but you can't do that from the tape
archive.

      Compression in the ARCHIVER is enormous.  Version 5.0 of the
ARCHIVER uses a Huffman Tree algorithm for compression.  Using Version
5.0 of the ARCHIVER, I once dumped approximately 178 sizable pds'es
onto one 3480 non-compressed cartridge.  That tape was very useful for
loading my tools down, at a later consulting job.  The ARCHIVER can be
found on File 147 of the CBT Tape, and Rick Fochtman has been working
on improvements for it.

      ASMTOZAP was written by Howard Gilbert at Yale University,
another old-timer.  ASMTOZAP is a PL/I program which allows you to
code a system modification zap as assembler code.  You code the zap in
assembler language using special control cards starting with the
keyword *ZAP.  Then you assemble the ASMTOZAP-format patch with your
assembler.  The *ZAP keywords come out as assembler comments in the
listing.  Finally, you post-process the assembler listing which
contains machine instructions and location counter information, with
the ASMTOZAP program to generate a system zap to the original module.
Some examples of ASMTOZAP patches can be found in File 369 of the CBT
Tape by looking at members starting with the letters "LM" (for Local
Mod).  My July 1989 column (which can be found on File 120 of the CBT
Tape) also illustrates the ASMTOZAP processing.

      The ASMTOZAP program looks at the *ZAP keywords in your
assembler listing, and performs actions to generate card-images.  If
you want to ASMTOZAP to punch a card, such as a ++USERMOD card, you
code a *ZAP CARD statement in your assembler code.  To make ASMTOZAP
start generating VER statements from the assembler code to follow, you
code *ZAP START VER.  ASMTOZAP will generate REP statements after *ZAP
START REP has been coded.  Finally, *ZAP END tells ASMTOZAP to stop
generating cards after that point in the assembly listing.
Displacements into system code are indicated by ORG statements in your
assembler code.  The advantage of coding a complicated system patch in
ASMTOZAP format, is that by changing a few ORGs, you can usually refit
the patch to a later version of the IBM module.  All VER and REP
displacements have been calculated by the assembler.

      ASMTOZAP was written by Howard Gilbert in PL/I Optimizer.  Some
shops aren't licensed for PL/I.  However, I modified a version of
ASMTOZAP so it would run under the free PL/I F compiler and library
that can be found on File 092 of the CBT Tape.  ASMTOZAP, and its
PL/I F equivalent, called ASMTOZAF, can be found on File 044 of the
CBT Tape.  Load modules can be found on File 035.  ASMTOZAP may now
be run by any MVS shop.  Take a look at ASMTOZAP.  It may make life
much easier for you, if you have system mods.

      We've discussed quite a number of tools this month, but it
doesn't even scratch the surface of what's available.  For more
information on the CBT tapes, you can see the current documentation
that is posted at http://members.aol.com/cbttape.  Good luck.  See
you next month.

