                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         November 1998

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@aol.com or sbgolob@attglobal.net.
Documentation about the CBT MVS Tapes can be found on the web, at
http://members.aol.com/cbttape .  The free PDS package can be obtained
online, at http://members.aol.com/freepds .


EXPANDING YOUR HORIZONS

      I think everybody in our business of systems programming will
agree on one fact:  In order to do this job well, you have to know a
lot!  How do you get to know a lot?  It doesn't just happen.  To know
what we have to know, one has to make a concerted effort over a long
period of time.  What I'm going to talk about today, is how to
increase the efficiency of making this effort, how to motivate yourself
to continue, and how to have fun at the same time.

      We systems programmers, like almost everyone else, learn things
on the job by being work-driven, rather than by being self-driven.  Of
course, it's good to be learn everything you can from the tasks you've
been assigned to do at work, but if it's supplemented by some of your
own initiatives, it gives you a real edge.  You can get "good" much
quicker.  It's also more fun, when you set your mind to learn something
and then do it.

      I'm very fortunate that at the beginning of my systems
programming career, I had a teacher, and I'd like to spend the rest of
this column discussing his ideas.  His name is Jeff Broido, and his
outstanding characteristic is that he is a very unselfish and
considerate man, besides being excellent technically.  For three
years, even when we were working at different places, I'd call Jeff
every day and tell him what I did at the job.  Even when I felt I knew
what I was doing, Jeff would tell me the history of the component, or
some background about the subject, that I hadn't known.  And if I
didn't know what to do, Jeff would, of course, enlighten me as far as
he could.  Having Jeff's influence early in my own career, inspired me
to help other people also, as much as I could.  The fact that I write
this column, comes directly from Jeff's inspiration and consideration.
If you find this column useful, you all "owe him one".

      Jeff had marvelous "rules" for a systems programmer to live
by, and I'd like to share some of them with you.  His first and foremost
rule, was that you should spend some time each day to learn something
new.  Usually, it was about a half hour.  We're all not kept "103% busy"
every day.  There's usually some "lull time", on many days.  That time
can be spent in the process of picking up some fact or technique.  For
example, Jeff himself once spent some of this time reading the ISPF
tutorial panels, until he knew all of them.  Then, when he had a tricky
editing job to do, he could do it in a short way, instead of taking all
day to do it.  This gave him even more time to learn yet another thing.

      The result of consistently applying Jeff's first rule is, that
instead of being "103% busy" all day, you get to average about
"50% busy", most of the time.  Call it "increased CPU capacity", but
whatever it's called, it sure makes life easier.  After my first two
or three years, I've spent most of my career being "50% busy" as a
result of this training.  All of my jobs got done on time, and
accurately.  It pays to "know stuff".  But it pays more, to keep
"learning stuff".

      The thinking behind "Jeff's first rule" is to replace a pattern
with another, better pattern.  What's the first pattern, which
everybody follows?  It's this:  "Everyone has to learn just enough to
do the job that's expected."  So what do we all do?  (And I'm included
in this.)  We're all panicky to learn just enough to get the job done,
and then we relax and "settle in", which consolidates our newly-learned
skills.  Then, when there's another job that again requires us to learn
something new, we get panicky again, and then settle in again.  It's a
cycle.

      Jeff's first rule is to especially take time learning something
new each day.  This serves to break into our cycle during the "settling
in" part, not letting it get too long.  The good part of the "settling
in" process is that it strengthens our existing knowledge, but the bad
part is, that if it gets too long, we aren't learning anything new,
when we could have.  If we force ourselves, by creating the time to
learn something completely new every day, we become self-driven to
expand our horizons, rather than remaining purely work-driven.


READING MANUALS.

      I have to admit that the process of reading manuals has changed
since the days when I learned this principle from Jeff.  In those years,
all of the manuals were printed on paper.  Today, many of them are on
cd-rom, and the information has to be read from a terminal screen.  In
spite of these differences, however, much of Jeff's idea still remains
largely applicable today.  Jeff taught me how to absorb information from
an entire manual, relatively quickly.

      The process seems easy and innocent enough, yet there's a vast
difference between "knowing about it" and actually doing it.  In order
to appreciate how really good this idea is, you have to actually do it
several times.

      When you have to learn a lot of things from a certain manual,
here's what you do.  Start at the beginning, and start turning the
pages, one at a time, spending about a second or two looking at each
page, until you go all through the entire manual, from the beginning
to the end.  For a 300 page manual, this should take about an hour.
Only afterward, do you start reading the things you're actually
interested in, in detail.  The difference that the "initial hour"
makes, is astounding.  A quick pre-knowledge of the material supplies
a perspective.  This includes a picture of how each topic relates to
other topics, a glance at the technical terms and names used by the
software, and a general overview.  Presumably you've also spent a
short time looking at all the pictures.

      After you've gotten the habit of doing this all the time, you'll
find that you can completely absorb new topics amazingly quickly.
You'll surprise your co-workers how much you know, without spending
significantly more time reading, than anyone else does.


USE TSO.

      I guess that this idea was more novel in the early days of MVS
than it is now, but it's surely just as applicable nowadays, maybe
even more so.

      In the earlier days of the OS operating system, batch jobs were
the "way of doing most everything".  To get the computer to do your
bidding, you'd submit a job.  At one time, there was no choice.  Once
TSO was invented though, its facilities eventually grew to the point
where 90 percent of what we accomplish, can be done directly through
our TSO terminal sessions, rather than by other means.

      TSO has a few big advantages over batch jobs.  For one thing, you
don't have to grab a new initiator every time you want to do some task.
Your TSO session has its own address space, and keeps holding on to it.
For a second thing, you don't have to wait for printing services.  The
result comes back right to your own screen, generally very quickly.
Thirdly, TSO greatly reduces the time that it takes to do short tasks,
and you don't have to wait for the results.  It's true that for long
tasks, batch operations are usually better, and they don't tie up your
terminal.  But Jeff's point in this area is, that if you expand your
collection of TSO-based tools, and your skill with them, you'll soon be
overjoyed how quickly you can get your work done, and how little batch
work you'll actually need.

      In the late '70s, when handy TSO-based tools were not so
generally available, Jeff taught himself how to write his own TSO
command processors, which are what programs running under TSO are
called.  By writing many assembler-based TSO programs to do his
tasks, Jeff was able to make is working life far more efficient.
Nowadays, people would probably do most of this work in REXX, which
of course, wasn't available then, although CLISTs were.  When one of
us "ordinary guys" would watch Jeff work, it would "blow our minds."
He had so many inventions, and he was so fast!

      Some of Jeff's programs can be found on File 423 of the CBT
MVS Tape, a huge collection of public MVS system programmer software
that's independently produced.  The NaSPA cd-rom contains a version of
the CBT Tape material that's updated once a year.  For the in-between
stuff you can order a tape, or you look at my web site for information.
We're currently trying to find a web-based home for the intermediate
updates to the tape.  If you're a member of SHARE, you can go to the
members-only section of www.share.org.

      Nowadays, many of the tools that Jeff had to invent, are
already available on the CBT Tape, or in vendor-supported products, or
they can be downloaded from sites on the web.  There is a galaxy of
TSO-based tools to make your work shorter.  I spend much of my time in
this column, describing some of them.

      For example, if you learn to use the TSO-based UCLA Fullscreen
ZAP program (File 134 of the CBT Tape) instead of IBM's AMASPZAP
(superzap) batch program, you'll see what you're doing much better,
and you'll probably save a lot of time getting the work done, too.  If
you install and learn the TSO-based free PDS program package, on File
182 of the CBT Tape and now on the web (http://members.aol.com/freepds),
you'll do lots of your jobs more quickly, saving perhaps 90 percent or
more, of the time you used to take.  (If your shop is licensed for the
vendor product called STARTOOL from Serena in Burlingame, California,
which is an outgrowth of free PDS, you just have to learn STARTOOL.)
If you've installed the single load module (from File 183 of the CBT
Tape) called SHOWMVS in your TSO/ISPF session, you'll be able to learn
more about your system in five minutes, than EDP auditors used to be
able to find out in several hours of digging.  The "unofficial" IBM
program called TASID, written by IBM'er Doug Nadel, which you can
download from the web, will also supply much of this information.

      Spending a half hour a day, just about every day, in learning
such tools, will pay you back in much more available time, so you can
learn even more.  That can make a difference between being just
"good", and being a real "crackerjack" at this trade.  The half hour
could be spent installing a new tool from the CBT Tape or elsewhere.
It could be spent reading a manual (in Jeff's "efficient" way).  Or if
you do something, anything, to expand your horizons, you've done a
very very positive thing.  You've helped yourself.

      Good luck.  See you next month.

