                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         February 1998

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  Sam can be reached at
sbgolob@aol.com or sbgolob@attglobal.net.


ASSORTED UTILITIES - PART 1

      In our field, there are several marks of a veteran.  The first
is a general knowledge and conceptual picture of the different parts
of the MVS (or OS/390) operating system.  Such knowledge usually takes
years to accumulate.  Second is an ability (acquired by experience) to
quickly isolate the component that is causing a problem, and to know
where to get help, or how to make an adjustment to fix the problem.
Third, a veteran should know how to set up the MVS operating system
from scratch, starting from the way IBM ships it.  Finally, the
veteran is constantly gathering an ever-increasing arsenal of tools,
always learning how to use them better.  You don't measure a veteran's
experience in years, but rather in technical savvy.

      Every MVS (or OS/390) installation is different, even though
they all have the operating system in common.  MVS shops are of
different sizes, and especially, different budgets.  It all depends
on what they are trying to accomplish from a business perspective.
Some shops are what we'd call "large", which support huge businesses,
and they buy a lot of vendor software and hardware products to satisfy
their large needs.  Other shops can be very small--either medium-sized
businesses or software development shops, with relatively low budgets.
And there are the "medium-sized" shops in-between, supporting large
businesses, who buy some vendor software to fit their needs, but they
aren't replete with a lot of "system programmer fancy tools", as the
large shops may be.

      This makes for differences in how the systems programmer, who
takes care of that installation's system, approaches the job.  In a
large shop, the systems programming tasks are segmented, and divided
among a considerable number of people.  It helps to have a few
veterans there, who can cut through the occasional tough problems
quickly, and generally guide the installation's progress in hardware
and software.  The veterans can also bring the more junior personnel
up to snuff, eventually making them veterans also.  A small shop is
run by one or two people possibly, and they have to be generalists.
The medium-sized shop, which is in-between, should always have at
least one veteran there, and if not, at least one systems programmer
who knows how to get access to lots of help.

      Tool-wise, there are many differences between small and large
shops.  Even with tiered pricing, the smaller and medium-sized shops
can only afford a limited number of vendor-supplied tools.  Thus, the
systems programmers there, have to "make do with less".  My
recommendation for this, which is being followed by more and more
people nowadays, is to learn how to use free software tools.

      MVS systems programmers are fortunate to have access to many free
tools and utilities, which are parts of huge software collections such
as the CBT MVS Utilities Tape.  The CBT Tape, which is independently
produced, is distributed by several sources, including NaSPA.  Contents
of the current version of the CBT Tape are now posted on the Internet,
at location:  http://members.aol.com/cbttape .  A version of the CBT
Tape is also part of the NaSPA cd-rom, which has been updated
approximately once a year.

      The idea of the CBT Tape is that if one systems programmer solves
a problem, why should all the others have to re-invent the wheel?  Many
interesting software solutions to various problems can be found there.
The CBT Tape is literally an MVS systems programmer's encyclopedia.
Today, we shall discuss one particular collection of assorted tools,
which was put together by a clever man, John V. Hooper.  John's tools
can be found on File 019 of the CBT Tape, and I'm sure that at least one
or more of John's dozen-or-so programs, can benefit any MVS shop.  This
collection was updated on Version 415 of the CBT Tape, and is running
on an OS/390 Version 1.2 system with JES2 at the appropriate level.


WHAT'S IN THE COLLECTION

      John Hooper's collection of programs covers various needs of his
medium-size shop.  From a glance at our descriptions, you'll quickly
see that a lot of key areas in the maintenance of an MVS environment
are covered.

      John has several programs which monitor the blocksize of datasets
globally, throughout the entire shop.  This has been done to improve I/O
efficiency, and has helped to eliminate bottlenecks in the company's
batch window.  A second group of programs constitutes a general job
performance and throughput analysis package.  Other programs do dataset
analysis and monitor DASD volume contents, using the appropriate SMF
records.  Of course, larger shops may accomplish this by buying SAS and
Barry Merrill's SMF record analysis package, but John Hooper's place
doesn't have SAS.  Therefore, John wrote some assembler programs to
cover this ground.  John has a console automation tool, which helps his
shop to simplify system startup and shutdown, without using a formal
automations package.  These programs are all free, are publicly
available, and have been running on an OS/390 system.  Do they whet your
appetite?  You can try them too.

      There's more.  There's an operator command to simplify the
control of the 3990-3 Cache Subsystem, which normally requires IDCAMS
subcommands that are quite complicated.  There's a program to report
Private Region size below the 16 meg line, right after IPL time, and
to make sure it isn't below a critical threshold.  If the Private
Region is too small, an alarm is sounded, in the form of a
non-rollable message to the operator console, and you're not stuck in
the middle of a production day, with a job or CICS region that won't
run.  John has a general map of the main storage areas in an MVS
system, and even though the large performance monitors also have such
a map, this one can also be run as a batch program to produce a
hardcopy report.  Another of John's programs will track a load module
in the link list or LPA libraries, displaying which library the
program is found in, or where in storage (if LPA) the program is
loaded.  This program also displays the beginning few bytes of each
module it finds, so you can get an idea of which version it is.
Finally, John can trace, through analyzing LISTCAT ALL outputs for all
catalogs, which DASD volume must contain which datasets.  This is
useful in an SMS environment where it's not clear on which exact
volume a dataset has been placed.  One can begin to recover, when a
particular DASD volume goes bad.  At least you know what datasets
should have been on it.

      Some, or all of these tools, may help you.  Now I'll go into a
bit more detail, so you can better judge for yourselves.  Please bear
in mind that these descriptions are only a beginning.  John Hooper's
utilities have much more depth than I can indicate here.


HERE ARE THE UTILITIES

      FLSMFDSN and BLKSCAN:  This combination of programs was designed
to eliminate bad block sizes of datasets in the entire shop.  The
FLSMFDSN program analyzes SMF type 14 and 15 records to cover non-VSAM
datasets, and type 64 records to cover VSAM datasets.  FLSMFDSN has a
large collection of sort and selection parameters, making it extremely
flexible.  FLSMFDSN can be used to flag all the datasets, in the entire
shop, which have inefficient block sizes.  After these have been
pinpointed, the BLKSCAN program is used to scan all the production and
test JCL, showing the origin of the inefficient block sizes.  All bad
JCL can be corrected, and those jobs will run more efficiently.

      FLSMFJOB:  The FLSMFJOB program gets its information from SMF
type 30 job and step records, reporting on the resources used by a job
step or an entire job.  A tremendous variety of execution and sort
parameters makes this program extremely useful in pinpointing jobs
which are hogging CPU or I/O.  Once these jobs, or job steps, have been
flagged, something can be done about the programming, to make them more
efficient.  This program has made it possible to delay a processor
upgrade in John's shop, saving a considerable amount of money.

      COMMAND:  At the time this program was written, John's
installation didn't have a formal automated operations package, but
its operation is large enough (it's a big chain of supermarkets) so
that system IPL and system shutdown are nevertheless quite
complicated.  Without the COMMAND program, complete IPL and system
shutdown procedures might take close to half an hour apiece.  With
this program, each takes only a few minutes.  COMMAND accomplishes
this by not only allowing for automatic issuing of MVS and JES2
commands, but by including DELAY and message REPLY subcommands also,
so that the proper components can come up (or down) in the proper
order, at the proper time, and with console WTOR messages properly
replied to.  This capability allows any shop to recover from an
emergency outage, with a very minimum of down time.  Business is
saved, and money is saved.

      John told me that even with a console automation package,
the COMMAND program is useful for backups of an individual application.
Using the COMMAND program, a single procedure can be written, which can
shut down the application, take the backup, and automatically restart
the application.  Auto ops packages aren't frequently used for that.

      CHECKPVT:  The CHECKPVT program is designed to run immediately
after IPL, and to report the maximum private area available for started
tasks, jobs, and TSO users.  After slight system maintenance, it is
possible for CSA to be allocated on a different boundary, an entire meg
lower, without you're even knowing it.  The private area can be cut by
an entire meg of virtual storage, making some large jobs or CICS
regions abend, when they are started later in the day.  This is not
particularly pleasant, and can necessitate an IPL for the backout of
maintenance in the middle of the day.  CHECKPVT will check the private
region size at IPL time, and will immediately write a non-rollable
message to the operator's console if it is less than a pre-determined
threshold value.  The production disturbance will be nipped in the bud.

      FLSMFCAT:  The FLSMFCAT program gets information from SMF records
to show ICF catalog activity at the dataset level.  Sometimes, when a
dataset is created or deleted, and the application fails, it is not
easy to tell who created or deleted the dataset.  The SMF ICF catalog
information is the best way to tell what happened.

      FLSMFSRT:  The FLSMFSRT program flexibly produces reports from
SYNCSORT SMF records.  This program allows John's installation to
monitor the larger sorts in production and test jobs.  Of course, the
program is only useful if your shop uses SYNCSORT as its sorting
utility product.

      FLVOLLST:  The FLVOLLST program is designed to print a report
listing all of the datasets on a volume based upon information from
the system catalogs.  This list could be critical in case of a DASD
failure which destroys the VTOC on the volume.  With volume pooling
now available through the use of DFSMS and other program products,
it is not always easy to determine the datasets which are on a
specific volume.

      The input to this program must be the output from an IDCAMS
LISTCAT command.  It is expected that an IDCAMS 'LISTCAT VOL
CAT(user.catalog.name)' command will be executed for each catalog in
the system.  The contents of these reports can then be passed to this
utility program to produce the report by volume and dataset name.

      MODLOOK:  The MODLOOK program is designed to run as a TSO
command, started task or a batch job to look up the selected module(s)
in the system link list or link pack area.  If the module is in the
link list, the link list library name will be displayed.  If the
module is in the link pack area, its address will be displayed along
with the name of the resident area in which it is located such as
PLPA, FLPA, ECSA, etc.  The first part of each module is displayed
also, since it can contain date, time, or copyright information which
may be of interest.

      With many libraries now in the system link list, it may not
always be apparent which dataset contains which program or even more
importantly, it may be difficult to determine which library contains a
module if duplicate module names exist.

      SMAP:  The SMAP program is designed to print the starting
address, ending address, and size of each of the main storage areas in
the MVS system.  This information can be displayed using most of the
popular monitors currently available, but not everyone has one.  Also,
this program can run as a batch job producing a hardcopy report.

      JES$LF:  The JES$LF program is a JES2 Exit 5 module, designed
to process the $LF command when entered.  It will give detailed
information at the output group level for jobs awaiting print.  This
is, in effect, a detailed version of the $DF command.

      In summary, you see that one person can come up with very
inventive tools to help the shop, and if he is gracious enough to make
the tools generally available, we all can benefit.  The CBT Tape is an
enormous collection of many such contributions.  I hope that the mention
of these utilities will encourage you to look at them.  Good luck.
We'll have more of these tools to show you, next month.

