                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          January 1999

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@aol.com or sbgolob@attglobal.net.
Information about the CBT MVS Tapes can be found on the web, at
http://www.cbttape.org   "Sponsored by NaSPA", and at
http://members.aol.com/cbttape .


CBT Tape Support Online

      Today I'd like to introduce you to an important new facility
and to place it in perspective, in relation to existing facilities.
This facility is the new online "home" of the CBT MVS Tape files:
http://www.cbttape.org "Sponsored by NaSPA".  While www.cbttape.org is
intended to serve MVS systems programmers all over the world, it is
not intended to supersede the CBT Tapes (as tapes) or the NaSPA cd-rom
disks.  Each of these has its own proper place, not interfering with
the usefulness of the others.  In this month's column, I hope to
explain how to make good use of all of them.

      Let's start with a little history.  Since the beginning days of
the MVS Operating System, and throughout the heyday of its predecessor
MVT, collections of "system mods and utilities" were prevalent, useful,
and necessary.  IBM's system design and programming efforts, while
enormous, could never be so thorough and pervasive, as to satisfy every
installaton's needs.  IBM operating system designers were the first to
recognize that fact.  Furthermore, if they themselves didn't recognize
some need, it was usually pointed out to them by members of user groups
like SHARE, GUIDE, and others.  IBM therefore deliberately left many
MVS system interfaces open for user development and customization.  In
earlier times, IBM also made most of the operating system source code
publicly available.  Thus, if IBM themselves didn't "get around to
filling some need", often the users themselves wrote their own code,
and solved the problems.

      We now come to the question of how "user-written code" would be
spread to systems programmers at other installations.  Back in the MVT
days, there were lots of "system mods tapes" that served as forums for
exchanging user-written code.  One of these forums was the famous
"Michigan Mods Tape" for the MVT operating system.  Shortly after MVS
was released in 1975, Arnold Casinghino, who worked at the Connecticut
Bank and Trust Company in Hartford, CT, started a similar tape, to
collect and distribute newly-written user modifications for the MVS
operating system, and to carry over many of the MVT modifications so
they'd work on MVS also.  Arnie pursued this project for many years,
with enormous dedication and attention to detail.  His collection became
known as the "Connecticut Bank and Trust Mods Tape", or "CBT Tape" for
short.  The CBT Tape has become the original source for many utilities
that are "floating around" in many MVS and OS/390 installations
throughout the world.  Probably most of the system programmers who've
used and modified those utilities, don't have a clue as to where they
originally came from.

      What can happen with user-written programs?  When IBM changes
the level of the MVS operating system, sometimes a user-written program
will continue to work, and sometimes it will have to be changed a bit,
to function as before.  When a user-written program is changed to adapt
to the newer MVS environment, the source code is almost always fixed
too.  Most user-programs on the CBT Tape come with complete source
code.  Often, the person who fixes some user code for a later version
of the MVS system, will send the fixes back to the proprietor of the
CBT Tape or whatever other collection it came from.  In that way, the
public has a chance to get access to the new code, and they also can
add their own improvements.

      There's also another side to this process.  From looking at
user-code, people can get to learn assembler language.  There's a
trend nowadays in systems programming which I call the "vendorization
of system utilities", or to put it more bluntly, "the unintentional
encouragement of system programmer ignorance".  While software vendors
are constantly churning out helpful program packages which we take
advantage of, they tend to hide their source code, so we can't use it
to learn how the system works.  Also IBM, with their "object code
only" or "OCO" policy that restricts access to much of their own
system code, systems programmers are getting blocked from access to
knowledge of system internals.  To top that off, there's a general
tendency in the MVS world, to go away from system customization.  It
makes system upgrades easier if there aren't so many "user mods", as
the saying goes, and this is true.  All of these trends are working
toward making systems programmers into mere "installers" who don't
know how to program, and who don't really know how most of the
components of the system work.

      Having access to source code for system utilities, is a great
force to counter this trend toward "system programmer ignorance".  It
also serves to make system upgrades easier, and not harder.  I'll
explain how.

      During a system upgrade, "tech support management" is sometimes
put under great pressure from a group of users, to upgrade a certain
user-written program that the users "can't do without".  I've seen
situations where the tech support management wants to cook up an
answer that "the utility isn't available any more", but the users won't
hear of it.  They send management the ultimatum that "if we can't have
that utility, we're not going to let you upgrade!"

      I don't wish to discuss politics, but sometimes there is an
answer that'll solve everything, and help our management to save face
under the user pressure.  Often, the original source of the utility in
question was the CBT Tape, or one of the other collections.  There were
other shops which had faced a similar situation in the recent past.
The utility had also stopped working for them.  Someone at that shop
went through the trouble to fix the utility, and they were considerate
enough of others, to send the fixes back to the proprietor of the
"software collection of origin".  If an installation that's trying to
upgrade, has a way of easily knowing about fixes to user-written
utilites, it solves many of their system upgrade problems.  All they
need do, is to install a later version of the utility in place of the
old version that no longer works.

      That's where newer versions of the CBT Tape come in, and that's
one of the main purposes of www.cbttape.org.  The CBT Tape (and the CBT
Overflow Tape for that matter) are upgraded quite often.  New versions
come out several times a year.  If you're busy upgrading a system, and
you're looking for the latest "fixes" to one of your favorite user
programs, you can now search for, and find these materials online,
without having to wait for a new CBT Tape to be shipped to you.
www.cbttape.org is connected to an ftp site that has all of the newest
CBT Tape files online and ready to be downloaded.  These files do not
require ASCII <---> EBCDIC translation.  They're in EBCDIC already.
All the files from the latest "CBT Overflow Tape" are there too.  The
www.cbttape.org site additionally gives you access to CBT Tape version
249, from 1985, which contains source for many user programs that can't
be found nowadays.  If the installation has lost the original source
for one of their programs, the CBT249 "ancient source code" files will
help them find them the original code that they can start fixing for
themselves and for others.


HOW DOES www.cbttape.org COMPARE WITH "REAL TAPES" AND THE NASPA CD-ROM?

      I'm still a big advocate of having a physical CBT Tape in your
possession.  It's nice to have it "all there", and not to have to
spend time downloading files over the Internet.  However, the CBT
Tape is updated quite often.  This year alone, there were over 100
significant changes.  Practically speaking, you can't order a new tape
every time one comes out.  You can try to get a recent one, but it's
nice to be able to get to the updated files if you need them.  Therefore
if you've got a recent tape, supplemented by access to www.cbttape.org,
you're well covered.

      Enter the NaSPA cd-rom.  The cd-rom files are IBM PC-oriented,
and most of them are meant to be loaded to a pc hard drive, unzipped,
and then uploaded to the mainframe using ASCII to EBCDIC translation.
This cd-rom is big in capacity.  It contains more material than just
the CBT Tape and the CBT Overflow Tape files.  There's the NaSPA VIP
tape materials and lots of other stuff too.  And it's all in one very
small package, available to be carried around on trips, or wherever
you're going.  The fact that the source code on the cd-rom is
represented in ASCII helps you read it on a pc.  You don't need a
mainframe to use the materials.

      Here are some disadvantages of the cd-rom.  Some special
characters are distorted during ASCII to EBCDIC translation, and when
certain source files, especially REXX execs, are uploaded to the
mainframe, they may not be accurate.  The cd-rom is only updated once a
year, whereas the tapes and the web site are kept up-to-date.  Thus,
without the web site, you might lose some of the latest utility support
for the newest systems.  A physical tape doesn't need ASCII to EBCDIC
translation, whereas the materials on the cd-rom usually do.

      Then again, the physical tapes, even the newest ones, have
disadvantages too.  One physical tape doesn't contain all the materials
in the CBT Tape, the CBT Overflow Tape, the NaSPA VIP tapes, and the
rest, which the NaSPA cd-rom contains in one small self-contained unit.
It comes out that both the physical tapes, and the cd-roms are
necessary, but they both have disadvantages that www.cbttape.org is
designed to alleviate.  I'd say that www.cbttape.org should best be
used as a supplement to the other two mediums, to make up for the
disadvantages of both of them.  Furthermore, www.cbttape.org provides
crucial program support whenever you need it, during odd hours when
you're upgrading or fixing your system.

WHAT MATERIALS ARE AVAILABLE?

      Regular readers of this column will have a very good idea of
how much your "system programming lifestyle" can be enhanced from
using tools and materials from the CBT Tapes.  I write about this stuff
here, every month.  But the free materials in the tapes are so vast,
that I can't even scratch the surface of what's available, in what I
write.  You have to search the tapes for yourselves.  For this reason,
I'd like to say a few words about how to search.

      The TAPEMAP program from File 299 of the CBT Tape, when run
against a CBT Tape itself, will report all member names of all pds'es
in all the files, in its second report, using its SYSPRNT2 ddname.
You can write this report to a disk file.  I usually designate a pds
that has LRECL=133, RECFM=FB or FBA, for the purpose, and copy TAPEMAP
reports to members of this pds.  Then I search the reports for a given
member name, and find all occurrences of the name, in all files on the
tape.  I can then load those files to disk, and see if they have what
I want.

      Another piece of advice is to write the 32000-odd lines of CBT
Tape documentation which is on File 001 of the tape, to disk, and
search that documentation for whatever type of material you're looking
for.  Sometimes that search will lead to paydirt, too.  Experience
tells me that both methods are sometimes needed, and they aren't 100
percent sure-fire.

      For example, suppose you want a coding example for an IBM open
exit, IFG0EX0B.  A search through the second TAPEMAP report will yield
all occurrences of pds member names which match IFG0EX0B.  However, if a
coding example for this exit routine is not called IFG0EX0B in the tape
file, you won't find it.  Using the other method, looking at the tape
documentation file, File 001, you're depending on the thoroughness of
the documentation.  Sometimes, a contributor of a file will have a code
example of this exit in his collection on that file, but whoever wrote
the description in File 001, neglected to mention that an IFG0EX0B
coding example is included there.  Either way, the search can fall
through the cracks and not find something, even if it is there.
However, you still have to try, and often you'll find what you want.

      Sam Knutson, the webmaster of www.cbttape.org, is now working on
a writing a search engine to help you find materials which are archived
at the ftp site.  As the facilities at the web site are improved, you
should find the site more and more useful.

      Currently, the contents of the files at the ftp site are
very complete, and if, for example, you need to download a copy of
the latest version of free PDS 8.5 (from File 182), or some of its
supplementary utilities (from Files 296 and 112), or of SHOWMVS from
File 183, very recent versions of these files are always kept posted.
These are just a few examples of many.  You can use www.cbttape.org to
keep your installed free utilities always up to date.

      The site at which all of these materials are archived, is, to
my knowledge, "guarateed to be up" 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
At least it's supposed to be very reliable, and very available.
There's also supposed to be quite a bit of redundancy there, so you're
very well supported, even at odd times, when you need the support the
most.

      Good luck in all your endeavors.  Technology is getting better,
and user-code support is getting better and better too.  I'm sure
this new facility will help you.  See you next month.

