                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         NOVEMBER 1999

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@attglobal.net or sbgolob@aol.com.
Information about the CBT MVS Tapes can be found on the web, at
http://www.naspa.net , after clicking on "Online CBT Tape".


LEARNING OUR TRADE

      Mainframes aren't going away.  In particular, MVS aka OS/390,
IBM's largest operating system, is very much here to stay.  A few
years ago, during the "client-server craze", there were rampant
rumors that MVS was "a dead dinosaur", and a new phrase got coined:
"management by magazine".  That was the result of very-high-level
managers getting caught believing the falsehood, touted in magazine
articles, that a large network of pc-based machines could "always"
outperform a standard mainframe.  The subsequent results have proven
them wrong.  IBM responded too.  To keep MVS marketable in the current
business setting, IBM added UNIX to MVS and added parallel processing
for scalability.  The result was a success for MVS.  And so, MVS is
here to stay.

      If that's the case, where are the MVS practitioners--the "MVS
system doctors" coming from nowadays?  The schools don't seem to be
producing them (except for Northern Illinois University and very few
others).  The old-timers are still working, although some of them have
retired.  Of necessity, companies are promoting operators as they did
before, and many of them have become very good systems programmers.
But where is the "formal MVS education" coming from?  To all
appearances, it's coming from nowhere.

      I don't mean to refer to the "education vendors", who are doing a
good job.  I've taken a number of one-week courses myself, to my great
benefit.  Courses are very fine, but they're only a few days long, and
they're usually only on one particular topic.  Where is the
apprenticeship under a master?  Or short of that, where can a systems
programmer build his or her skills on a regular basis, over an extended
period of time?  Of course there's "on the job training", which is our
mainstay.  But "OJT" is spotty, depending on what job the installation
needs done at the moment.  That's what you learn at OJT.  Is there an
organized course somewhere?  One that lasts at least five or six
months?

      There used to be.  At one point in time, there was a thriving
school for practicing systems programmers:  the NYU Information
Technology Institute.  At this extension of New York University, some
expert systems programmers taught many aspects of the trade.  One of
those highly regarded teachers is Carmine Cannatello, whose Advanced
Assembly Language course eventually led to his writing a book.  I have
an opinion about this.  I think Carmine's book, "Advanced Assembler
Language and MVS Interfaces", now in its long-awaited Second Edition,
is the most relevant single organized source of MVS-related assembler
knowledge that's publicly accessible, in existence.


Come and Learn Assembler.

      Let's start by mentioning the fact that even though one can be an
MVS systems programmer without knowing much assembler, it's admittedly
an enormous handicap.  Almost all of the IBM system routines are
written in assembler language.  (I consider PL/S, PL/AS, or PL/X to
actually be assembler language, from the MVS support point of view,
because the result of a PL/* compile is really assembler code.)  If you
have to diagnose a problem in IBM code, you can't understand what's
really going on, if you don't know the machine instructions.  In
addition, if you don't know assembler, the idea of coding your own
system-level utility is almost an impossible dream.  A knowledge of
REXX helps, but it's no real substitute.  If you're not (at least
moderately) skilled in assembler language coding, it's time to get with
it!

      I'd suggest, after having taken an introductory one-week assembler
course or its equivalent, that everyone read and refer back to Carmine
Cannatello's new book.  The information found there, would take much
longer to acquire if you had to go elsewhere.  Carmine's book is
extremely well organized, and it provides a world of deep information,
presented simply.  The book starts by taking pains to get you into good
coding habits, and it then systematically takes you through a tour of
just about all the elements which comprise system level assembler
coding.  I'd say that if a junior level systems programmer invests six
months or so, going through Carmine's book thoroughly, he or she will no
longer be at a junior level, in any sense of the word.

      Please refer to Figure 1, which lists a chapter outline of
Carmine's "Advanced Assembler" book.  From a glance, it'll be clear that
the book covers a wealth of MVS system services, and how to use them in
assembler programs.  The great majority of seasoned systems programmers
don't know ALL of these techniques, so the book provides good reference
material, even for very advanced MVS practitioners.

      Before covering the contents of Carmine's book in more detail,
I feel I also have to mention another enormous source of assembler
knowledge, which will greatly strengthen what you learn from reading
this book.  That source is the CBT MVS Utilities Tape, and the CBT
Overflow Tape, which are now online on the web.  (Just go to
www.naspa.net and click on "Online CBT Tape".)  These tapes comprise
an enormous free collection of MVS utilities, most of which come with
source code that you can study.  Most of the code on the CBT Tapes is
working code (at least, it worked somewhere), and you can usually
demonstrate the results, while you study the code which produces
them.  Dave Alcock, who contributes a very large file (File 311, over
50000 lines of code) to the CBT Tape, told me that he learned most of
his assembler coding from looking at examples in the CBT Tape.
That's quite an effective testimonial.  The CBT Tapes, started in
1975 by Arnold Casinghino, and now up to Version 421, are updated
continually, quite a few times a year.  If you want to contribute to
the CBT Tape collection, please contact me by email.


Some Details from the Book.

      Please refer to Figure 1, which is a chapter summary of Carmine's
book.  From the first glance, you'll notice the enormous breadth of the
topics covered.  I can say from my own experience, that the techniques
this book deals with, are extremely relevant to the understanding of
the workings of MVS system routines and MVS system tools, both user-
and vendor-developed.  If you know these techniques, you're in a far
better position to understand and maintain the MVS operating system.

      Chapter 1 contains eighteen rules for good assembler coding.  In
the old days--the 60s and early 70s, when a system programmer had to
literally write extensions to the operating system, there was a lot of
code written which violated these rules.  Many systems have crashed,
after someone else later would try to understand and modify such unclear
code.  Carmine starts you off by showing you never to write assembler
code in unclear ways which are difficult to modify.  Such ideas as
branching to labels instead of to displacements, not altering
instructions, writing meaningful DS statements, writing meaningful and
descriptive comments, using simple instructions and easy-to-follow
logic, and so forth, sound like "nice things to emphasize".  But anyone
familiar with very old code, can tell you the terrible things which can
happen if these rules are not followed.  Carmine is doing the world an
enormous service with his first chapter.  This material should be well
absorbed, and not taken lightly.

      Chapter 2 talks about how to set up your programs, so they're
easy to follow, modify, and debug.  It pays to write your code in small
segments, so that if something is wrong, you can more easily pinpoint
which segment is causing the problem.  A small straight piece of code
is easier to fix than a big, spaghetti-like, tangled, branching piece
of code that's many pages long.  A description of some testing and
diagnostic techniques finishes this chapter.

      Chapter 3 is about writing macros.  As you know, macros are
pseudo-instructions which expand into chunks of assembler code at
assembly time.  Not everybody writes their own macros, but it's
essential that every decent assembler programmer know how a macro
works.  A necessary part of the workings of a macro, is the conditional
assembler language, which will assemble some code, and skip assembling
other code, depending on conditions at assembly time.  Conditional
assembly enormously increases the effectiveness of the general-purpose
assembler macros that can be written.

      From Chapter 4 until the end of the book, Carmine systematically
and clearly explains one advanced technique after another.  In my
experience, a lot of existing system code can be understood clearly, if
you've covered all of these techniques.  But there's one additional
advantage--you'll learn to write the stuff yourself!  I've constantly
amazed myself, in my own career, by writing system code, and
discovering that it actually worked!  With the authoritative, clear and
simple explanations which Carmine gives, you'll experience that same
joy, and you'll feel that same "high", over and over again.  Besides,
you'll actually help your installation a lot by writing effective
system tools and by fixing tough system problems.

      In the book's new Second Edition, a chapter on ESA coding has
been added, and you can learn about basic AR-mode techniques.  ESA and
OS/390 systems have many components which use the extended addressing
facilities.  You need to know how these are coded, in order to solve
system problems, as well as to understand how those components work.

      In summary, I'd say that it's impossible to be called a
senior-level MVS systems programmer in any sense, without at least a
moderate level of skill as an assembler language programmer.  Just
about every one of us sometimes has to write an exit, or fix an exit,
or look at a system problem and figure out what instructions are
causing it.  Carmine Cannatello's marvelous book, "Advanced Assembler
Language and MVS Interfaces", can take all of us to a far higher level
of MVS system understanding, as well as to a high level in actual
assembler coding skill.  Good luck to all of you.  I'm looking forward
to seeing you again next month.


  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 1.   Chapter Summary of "Advanced Assembler Language and
            MVS Interfaces" (comments in parentheses are mine)


   Chapter  1:  Assembler Language Programming Style and Content
                (i.e. developing "good programming habits" from
                the start)
   Chapter  2:  Assembler Language Programming Development and
                Structure (easy to follow program control and
                commenting, plus much more basic technique)
   Chapter  3:  The Macro Facility and Conditional Assembler
                Language (how to understand and write macros)
   Chapter  4:  Supervisor Services and Macro Instructions
                (real goodies--EXTRACT, LOAD, LINK, XCTL, TIME,
                STIMER, GETMAIN-FREEMAIN etc etc.)
   Chapter  5:  Advanced Assembler Language Techniques
                (essential things you gotta know, plus nice touches)
   Chapter  6:  Programming ABEND recovery (SPIE, ESPIE, ESTAE, etc.)
   Chapter  7:  Programming Dataset Allocation (RDJFCB and OPEN
                TYPE=J.  SVC 99 programming.)
   Chapter  8:  Processing a Partitioned Dataset (BPAM, QSAM, BSAM...)
   Chapter  9:  Programming Paging Efficiency (rare knowledge)
   Chapter 10:  Selected Advanced Supervisor Services Macros
                (APF authorization, MODESET, TESTAUTH, RESERVE,
                SETLOCK, SVCUPDTE, SYSEVENT, etc.)
   Chapter 11:  Introduction to Channel Programming (EXCP--wow!)
   Chapter 12:  Writing SVC Routines (and dynamically loading them)
   Chapter 13:  Using the MVS Common Area (you gotta know about this)
   Chapter 14:  Programming Using 31-bit Addressing
   Chapter 15:  Inter-Address Space Communications (SRB, Cross
                Memory Services - the old ways)
   Chapter 16:  Extended Addressability (the new ways... AR mode,
                Data Spaces, Hiperspaces, etc.)
   Appendix A:  The Assembler
   Appendix B:  The Linkage Editor


  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 2.   Where to Get This Book

        Title:      Advanced Assembler Language and MVS Interfaces
                    Second Edition
        Author:     Carmine A. Cannatello
        Publisher:  John Wiley & Sons Inc.
                    Professional, Reference and Trade Group
                    650 Third Avenue
                    New York, NY 10158-0012
                    (800) 225-5945   x2497
        ISBN:       0-471-36176-3

