                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         SEPTEMBER 1999

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@attglobal.net or sbgolob@aol.com.
Information about the CBT MVS Tapes can be found on the web, at
http://www.naspa.net , after clicking on "Online CBT Tape".


PC's, C, and ASSEMBLER

      One thing that strikes me about this profession is how much time
and effort we have to spend, learning about new things.  When I started
in this business, a so-called "intelligent terminal" was just about
unknown.  Everybody used "dumb terminals".  Nowadays, it is extremely
uncommon for any MVS systems programmer to use a "real 3278" or its
equivalent.  Practically all of us use pc's which emulate a color
terminal that has graphics.

      Most pc's that are being used by MVS sysprogs today, are running
some form of Windows, usually of the 9x or NT variety.  An MVS person
absolutely has to know, at minimum skill level, how to navigate in
Windows.  Administering Windows is another matter.  If you work at a
big company, you generally leave that to the "PC Department" or the
"Network Administrators".  If you run your own shop, like me, you have
to learn about the Registry, how to back up essential system files, and
many other related things, so as to be able to recover from system
errors, burps, glitches, and having unwanted instances of the system
modifying itself.  When I installed Windows 98 second edition, I spent
$130 on books:  "Windows 98 Resource Kit" and "Running Windows 98" from
Microsoft, and "Windows 98 Registry for Dummies", which is an oxymoron
if I ever heard one.  You've got to be pretty smart to read that book,
but it's worth every penny!

      I have one more observation which reflects the nature of these
times.  Somebody sent me a request, via email of course, that he
wanted a CBT Tape in tape form.  He explained that he was a consultant
at a site which didn't have any way of loading a pc file up to the MVS
mainframe.  Of course, you all know that the CBT MVS Tape materials are
on the Internet now (just go to www.naspa.net and click on "Online CBT
Tape").  However when you download the files, unless your mainframe has
a direct TCP/IP connection, you get the files on a pc and have to upload
them to MVS.  I wondered if his was still a common predicament, so I put
a notice out on the IBM-MAIN news forum, and asked if anyone else had
the same problem as this fellow.  I got nary an affirmative reply, and a
bunch of snickers and laughs from "the folks out there".  Times surely
have changed.  The MVS sysprog world is definitely "wired to the pc and
the Internet" nowadays.

      All of this stuff is seemingly unrelated to our actual business
of MVS Systems Programming.  After all, it's our "official business" to
set up the mainframe, so it works.  People who work with pc's at home,
or for a living, might have to know such things, not us!  But the world
is marching on, and it's different now.

      Today I'm going to talk about some interesting new products that
relate to MVS Systems Programming directly, and which run on a pc, or
they're related to the pc world.  These products are there, to help us
adjust to the new way of doing our business.  Once we see what these
products are all about, we can be very glad that there's a bridge
between the old "way of the world" and the new one.  Just to read about
the existence of such products, will enlarge our comfort zone with the
way this world is now becoming.

      In this column, I usually write about free tools that everyone
can obtain and use.  This month, I'm making an exception, because I
feel that we should know about some different concepts that will expand
our horizons and our ways of looking at things.  In our day and age,
that's a direction in which we're being forced to grow.  PC programs
usually aren't free, although their prices are normally far below the
astronomical cost of most mainframe products.  I still think you'll get
a lot of use out of this information.


The Tachyon Assembler, Operating System, and File Tools

      David Bond is a very skilled programmer, and a nice person also.
David has written a super product, which I could not believe, until I
tried it myself.

      Imagine writing an MVS assembler program using SPF/PC or some
other file editor, on your pc.  Then you assemble it on the pc, create
data files to try it out, and test it using an interactive debugger
that displays registers, an authentic PSW, and all kinds of program
data, as it runs.  You debug the program, reassemble it on the pc,
upload the object decks to the mainframe, linkedit them, and run a
clean, debugged program, the first time it runs under MVS.  Is this
Science Fiction?  It definitely is not.  I did it myself.

      We are talking about the Tachyon Cross Assembler and the Tachyon
Operating System (TOS).  I'll talk about the new Tachyon File Tools
later.  These packages are super equipment for the modern sysprog and
Assembler software developer.

      David Bond has written these tools using standard ANSI C, and
so they are portable across many platforms.  Imagine running an IBM-
compatible assembler and debugger on a UNIX machine or a pc!  This
Tachyon Cross Assembler is almost completely compatible with the High
Level Assembler, Version 3.


Tachyon Details.

      The Tachyon suite of products currently has three separate parts,
which are licensed separately:  the Tachyon Cross Assembler, the Tachyon
Operating System (TOS), and the Tachyon File Tools.

      The Tachyon Assembler (called X390) takes ASCII source code
input, translates it into EBCDIC in a standard way, and assembles it to
produce an MVS-compatible object deck (FB-80), which of course is
EBCDIC also.  This object deck can be uploaded to the MVS machine, and
linkedited as is.  A listing is produced by the Tachyon Assembler,
which looks very much like a comparable listing using IBM's High Level
Assembler.  Just about all of the assembler error handling you're
accustomed to with the High Level Assembler, can also be found on the
Tachyon Assembler as well.

      Although X390 does take ASCII source, convert it to EBCDIC and
assemble, there are times when you need to be able to give it EBCDIC
source (say, for a REPRO card).  X390 "automagically" recognizes the
input is already in EBCDIC and properly handles this situation.  So,
you can give X390 EBCDIC or ASCII source, and it will "do the right
thing."

      The Tachyon Cross Assembler has a convenient GUI interface to
Windows (9x or NT), which is called TIDE (Tachyon Integrated Development
Environment).  Under Windows, you get into TIDE, pull up a source
program into a window, assemble it interactively, and look at all the
error messages, if there are any.  You click on a given error message,
and the assembler source is positioned to the appropriate line of code,
so you can correct the error.  The file which will contain the assembler
listing can be determined by settings in the X390.INI file, which is
where defaults for the assembler are set.  Defaults can also be changed
very conveniently, from within the TIDE GUI interface.  This facility is
like SYSTERM, except that you have another window for correcting the
assembler source that's in error.

      Under the Tachyon Cross Assembler, a listing is produced that is
just as informative as the IBM High Level Assembler's listing.  In fact,
the two listings are very compatible with each other.  Under Windows,
you can get into SPF/PC in another window, and browse the assembly
listing, at the same time you're still looking at the assembler source
and errors in TIDE.  Windows does make MVS assembler programming more
convenient than it was on the mainframe under TSO.  Also, response time
on the pc is much quicker.  When you've finished assembling, you have an
object deck, which you can upload to the mainframe for linkage editing.

      That's as far as it goes if you have the Tachyon Cross Assembler
only, which, by the way, is covered by the same license no matter how
many computers the single user has.  For example, if a programmer has
the Tachyon Assembler licensed for the desktop at work, it could also be
used on a laptop while traveling, so you can do assembly work on a train
or in a hotel.  And the license also covers the home computer, so the
programmer can be much more flexible and productive at all times.

      The Tachyon Operating System is a separately licensed product
that works together with the Tachyon Cross Assembler.  Since the MVS
linkage editor needs to put its load modules into a partitioned dataset,
and there aren't any pds'es on a pc, David Bond had to write a special
binder of his own, to create program objects that will run under his
Tachyon operating system on the pc.  This binder program, which is the
Tachyon equivalent of the MVS Linkage Editor, is called B390.  B390
issues its own messages, not unlike those issued by the OS/390 binder.

      Once the program object is created, you have to run it.  The
Tachyon Operating System has some remarkable JCL-like capability in
running programs.  Using the Tachyon program J390, you execute JCL,
which can either point to ASCII files or EBCDIC files.  And once all
the file locations have been set up and the JCL executes, MVS-like run
time messages are produced, and the output gets "spooled" (as a file on
a subdirectory) so you can look at it to see how everything ran.  The
run-time information looks like an MVS batch job, and it is remarkably
detailed, even including instruction and I/O counts.

      Before leaving our discussion of the Tachyon Software product
offerings, I'd like to say that the Tachyon File Tools, a useful
collection of utilities that will definitely grow in the future, help
complete the convenience of moving an MVS environment over to one or
more pc's.  Tachyon offers a super-useful un-XMIT utility, and an
IEBUPDTE utility:  TUX and TUU respectively.  I've used TUX extensively.
If you have an MVS macro library, and you put it into TSO XMIT format
using the OUTDSN keyword, you can download the entire maclib to a pc,
and run TUX against it.  Almost instantly, the entire library is dumped
into a subdirectory and converted to ASCII member by member.  The macros
are instantly available for use by the Tachyon Assembler.

      What happens when a load module library is put into XMIT format,
downloaded to the pc, and given the TUX treatment, is even more
remarkable.  The load modules are delinked, csect by csect, into object
decks, suitable for re-binding by the Tachyon binder, so they can be
executed under the Tachyon Operating System.  You can even use TUX as a
mainframe delinker, uploading the resulting object decks, unchanged,
back to the mainframe.  These programs stand on their own merit, even
independently of the Tachyon Assembler and other Tachyon Software
products.

      David Bond tells me that TUX has been used by companies, in ways
completely unrelated to the Assembler.  One company has customers who
have trouble downloading things, such as dumps.  That company tells
their customers to put this data into TSO XMIT format and send it to
them via email or ftp.  Then, at the support site, the support people
use TUX on the pc to look at the data.

      If you want to find out more about the Tachyon Cross Assembler,
TOS, and the Tachyon File Tools, contact
http://www.tachyonsoft.com/tachyon.


The Amazing Dignus Systems/C Compiler

      Dave Rivers has been a compiler writer practically all of his
working life.  What he has produced, in my opinion, is second to none.

      We systems programmers all know about IBM's PL/S, PL/AS, and PL/X
compilers, that IBM developed for their internal use only.  How do they
work?  Operating system code developers code a system-level program in a
PL/I-like language that's quick, and their code compiles to assembler
source code.  The developer can even mix "raw assembler" code with the
PL/I-like stuff, if assembler language will do the job better.  IBM has
used this system for its own development for many years now.

      Dave Rivers has come up with something even better than that.
Dave has written a C-language compiler which compiles to assembler
language source code, and which allows the programmer to mix in "raw
assembler" code, whenever he feels it'll do the job better.  This is
very similar to PL/X, except that it's C, not PL/I.  And it's "pure C",
not "PL/I-like".  For this obvious reason, Dave calls his product
Systems/C.

      There's something very modern (and with the times) in this.  Most
people coming out of Computer Science school nowadays learn to program
in C-language, which is a cross-platform standard, and which is very
pervasive in the industry nowadays.  If you're writing system-level
code, with the Dignus Systems/C compiler, you have a sort-of "instant
PL/X" and a whole crop of trained programmers who are equipped to use
it.  This is not only helpful to software developers, but it is an
extremely useful product for normal MVS applications and system groups
who want to convert their coding to C.  Besides the C source itself,
you also get assembler source, which is far more finely customizable.
This product has tremendous win-win potential.

      At Dave Rivers' web site:  http://www.dignus.com , you can
actually put in a C-language program (up to 200 lines) and watch how
the Dignus Systems/C compiler converts it to assembly language.  And
you can see the compile listing and everything, online.  Dave has
also contributed a couple of files to the CBT MVS Utilities Tape (go
to www.naspa.net and click on "Online CBT Tape").  File 419 consists of
C-source, the equivalent assembler source, and user documentation for
several popular C programs, so they can be run on MVS.  File 420 is a
load library which contains the executables for these same programs.

      I'd like to add that Dignus System/C can be made to dovetail
very nicely with the Tachyon Assembler and Operating System.  If you
have C-language source code, you can compile it into assembler source
using Systems/C, and then assemble the assembler source on a pc, using
the Tachyon Assembler.  You can then run the object code wherever you
want--either uploaded to the mainframe and linkedited, or under TOS on
the pc.  As I said before, it's a new world today.  The flexibility is
amazing.

      As a final note, and to say something about MVS freebie tools,
I'm happy to announce that Version 421 of the CBT MVS Tapes will be
available soon.  This new version of the CBT Tape alone, has
approximately 45 additional and updated files.  It's a big change from
even the last version.  There's a lot of interesting stuff out there
for everybody.  Good luck.  We hope to see you again next month.


