                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                           April 1999

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@aol.com or sbgolob@attglobal.net.
Information about the CBT MVS Tapes can be found on the web, at
http://www.cbttape.org   "Sponsored by NaSPA", and at
http://members.aol.com/cbttape .


AWARENESS

      Today I'm going to speak about how "aware" we have to be, while
we're doing our jobs.  To my knowledge, nobody talks about this topic
directly.  But everybody has great respect for an MVS Systems
Programmer (or for anyone else) who is "aware".  And by exposing this
subject to discussion, I hope to bring information to light, that
will help all of us (including myself) become more useful to our
employers and clients.

      Awareness begins with one's job description, and goes on from
there.  Of course, if you're doing any job, you have to know what your
management, or customers, expect from you.  This is the minimum job
awareness that is expected of anybody.  Satisfying the (reasonable)
expectations of those who require your services, is the minimum
obligation everyone has to fulfill.  Those who hire you, have to "get
what they pay for".  However, one's job description doesn't always
accurately say what you REALLY have to do.  At many shops, no one will
expressly tell you what you really have to do, although they might
hint at it.  The problem partially comes from "management's" lack of
ability to phrase the requirements correctly and put them down on
paper.  And it partially comes from the fact that you, the technician,
have to be aware of more things than anyone else thinks you have to be
aware of.

      For example, many years ago, I worked for an extremely "budget
conscious" shop.  Our management was under constant, unspoken pressure
to run the operation for less money, out of fear of being outsourced.
Nobody ever told me specifically that this was supposed to affect what
I had to do.  We did hear constantly, that there was a threat of our
being outsourced.  My boss often told me (this was in the mid-80's)
that he'd always ask a software salesman the (then) unpopular question
of:  "How much does this product cost?"

      I figured out several things from this, without expressly being
told:  First, I wouldn't ever get any utilities I wanted, unless they
were for free.  Second, if management could get their hands on a free
tool instead of having to buy one, they probably wouldn't mind it.  Of
course, with a free tool, there's always a "support" question.  But
the balance would be, that for a utility that wasn't totally
essential to the running of the shop, they'd probably rather rely on
my support skills, than have to pay any more money.

      From this situation, I learned that I'd be wise to familiarize
myself with the world of free MVS tools, and also to make myself aware
of the trends of new MVS system changes within IBM.  After all, IBM
might put a new feature into MVS, that would spoil the operation of
one of our free utilities.  I had to know enough, in advance, to
anticipate any problems, and get a handle on solving them when they'd
come up later.  In addition to that, I knew I needed to establish a
network of friends, who might be able to "bail us out" when we needed
help.  We couldn't pay for such help.  I knew that "to have a friend,
you have to be a friend".  So I also prepared myself to help anyone
else, from a different shop, who might need my expertise and
experience.

      Besides all of that, I needed, and got, my management's express
approval.  My boss came to realize that the survival of his shop
depended, in part, on the success of my efforts, and he supported me.
He let me call systems programmers from other shops during work hours,
because he knew that my efforts would eventually decrease our shop's
"down time", and it'd enhance his image with upper management when our
shop ran well.  Vendor products were not left out of my program.  I
made friends with a lot of third-party software support people, so that
if we needed help later from them, it would be quickly forthcoming.  My
boss let me do many favors for them, such as making tapes of free
software for them.  Later, I had friends in many places, when I needed
them for the "health" of our own shop.

      None of this was written in my job description.  Being "aware"
helped to inform me, as to what I had to do.  I personally was
responsible for our not having to buy several hundred thousand dollars
worth of third-party vendor software.  During my tenure at that shop,
we resisted approximately six outsourcing attemps.  Every single time,
our management was able to demonstrate that we could run the shop more
efficiently, and for less money, than the outsourcing company could.

      In the process of doing this, I accumulated a lot of experience
for myself, which stood me in good stead when I changed companies
later, and when I worked as a consultant.  Most of my "support
friends" from those days, have remained friends of mine to this day.
I'm trying to say that you can gain large benefits from being "aware",
which will help you personally, as well as helping your current
employer or clients.


HOW TO BE AWARE

      Being aware often involves "using your head", "listening to
the news", and talking with other people.  I've found that you need
to be aware about new hardware and software that's not (yet) running
at your shop.  Many of my friends regularly read the IBM Announcement
Letters that are posted on IBMLink or on the Internet at IBM's web
site.  This keeps them abreast of trends at IBM.

      A useful source of "news" is the IBM-MAIN newsgroup forum,
where you can see people's problems with hardware and software that
you may, or may not, be using.  You can participate in the newsgroup
discussions, or you can just watch what the other folks are saying.
Either way, you're sharpening your skills up, and you're making
contact with other people.

      In case you want to know about the IBM-MAIN newsgroup, or
other newsgroups in our field, see my past column (April 98) called
"Other People's Problems".  The network address of IBM-MAIN has
changed since then.  The list server is at LISTSERV@BAMA.UA.EDU ,
and the forum itself is at IBM-MAIN@BAMA.UA.EDU .

      The Internet has opened up many avenues to finding out more
news.  Several sites post links to S/390 information sites all over
the world.  A systems programmer in Belgium, Eric Loriaux, has
established a marvelous site to gather all kinds of MVS information
links in one place.  Eric's US mirror site is at www.loriaux.com ,
and his main site is at http://www.ping.be/~ping1475 .  Our online
CBT Tape site, which you can reach from www.naspa.net by clicking
on "Online CBT Tape", also has links to many other MVS-related
web sites.  By starting at these places, you probably can eventually
reach almost everywhere else.

      I've found that SHARE conferences are a marvelous, concentrated
"awareness centers".  They occur twice a year.  Winter ones (usually
in February) are in a Western city.  Summer ones (usually in August)
are in an Eastern or Central city.  As of this writing, the SHARE
conference in San Francisco has just ended, and just from talking to
my friends, I can feel the vibrancy and new zest for life, which that
conference has generated in them.  The SHARE membership requirements
have changed, and you can now become a SHARE member by yourself,
without relying on your company, and without requiring your running
any IBM equipment.  (Of course you have to pay the money yourself,
too.)  But now I am a SHARE member by myself, and I've gotten a lot
of benefit from going to several of the conferences as a consultant,
without having to rely on another company's SHARE membership.  Go to
www.share.org for information about SHARE.

      SHARE conferences provide opportunities for the most concentrated
systems programming schooling I've ever seen.  It's not automatic.
You have to plan which sessions you'll attend, very carefully, and
you have to make sure you physically get yourself there.  But the
opportunities for increasing your awareness can be unequalled.  I once
took about 40 "random" questions from everybody in my shop, to a SHARE
conference.  I worked very hard, but I came back from SHARE with
authoritative answers (from experts) to every one of them.  If I didn't
get the answers at a session, I got them from talking to people in the
hallway between sessions, or at SCIDS.

      SCIDS at SHARE is a five-hour evening open ballroom session,
where anybody can sit at a table and talk to anybody else.  If you
have a special interest, some of the tables are marked as belonging
to a special interest group.  When I had VM questions (as an MVS
systems programmer), I'd go to the VM table at SCIDS and ask them
there.  The same went for anything else.  Storage Management has
their table at SCIDS.  Different databases have theirs, and so forth.
SCIDS is an excellent opportunity to go "across fields" or to speak
to other people in your own special area of expertise.  Besides going
to SCIDS at SHARE, there's a "vendor EXPO", and you can talk to all
the vendors' representatives directly.

      At SHARE, you can get "real addresses" and phone numbers of IBM
people and others.  I always collect everyone's business cards.  At
SHARE, all the IBM people are allowed to give them out.  When you have
a difficulty, if you have a real IBM'er to call, or a real person from
another vendor, you sometimes can slice through a tough problem in a
small fraction of the time it'd normally take to solve.  Even one-time
SHARE attendance is valuable.  But regular attendance is extremely
helpful in increasing your awareness.

      If you have a special concentrated interest, you might spend
some of your SHARE time with a committee.  SHARE committees are a
means of enhancing your own knowledge.  But they are also the direct
vehicle for affecting IBM.  I was once chairman of a committee which
we established, to get IBM to modernize Assembler H.  Greg Mushial
of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) had created many
user enhancements to IBM's Assembler H, from source code, and we
were trying to get IBM to adopt and support them.  At SHARE, in the
Assembler Committee, we got together with many like-minded users,
vendor developers, and IBM'ers.  It was a tough fight, getting IBM
to move, but eventually our efforts paid off, and IBM came out with
the High Level Assembler for all its S/390 platforms.  The entire
world is benefiting, and we can really feel that we made the big
difference.


WHEN TO GROW IN AWARENESS

      There are many ways to grow in awareness, and you can grow all
the time.  It pays to be flexible in looking for opportunities.  It
may be hard for some of us to influence our employers to send us to a
SHARE conference.  So meanwhile, we can look elsewhere.  Internet
access is easier, so we can spend time following the links at Eric
Loriaux' site and other sites to discover places to explore.  Since
all the CBT MVS Tape materials are now online, you can download all
sorts of user-written code to study and MVS utilities to use.
Following the IBM-MAIN discussions is an opportunity, too.  It all
depends on your taste, and your daily schedule.

      Here's something that not so many people are aware of.
You can grow more aware, just by doing your job.  I'll show you
why.  It's simple.  Your employer can't ever take your experience,
which you've gained at the job, away from you.  Your experience
remains yours.  Your labor, which they've paid for, is theirs.

      I like to express this as my "50-50, 100-100 Rule".  When
you're doing your job at work, your employer and you yourself, split
the benefits 50-50.  But it's not really 50-50.  Your employer gets
100 percent of your work, and you get 100 percent of your experience.
So the benefit is really split 100-100.

      It makes a big difference to think this way.  Sometimes an
employee can be annoyed at the company, or the boss, for some reason.
Is that a cause to stop working?  No!  If you stop working, you're
cutting yourself off from the 100 percent of the new experience that
you'd gain simply by doing your job.  New experience brings new
awareness, and it always makes you a more useful person, valuable
to any employer or client, as well as your current one.

      So, new awareness comes every moment of your working day.
However, I, myself, advocate the "looking outward for a fraction of
the time" approach.  I feel you can't do this job really well, without
looking at the world outside.  My teacher Jeff Broido drove that idea
into me very strongly, during my early years in this trade.  And you
have to invest some time in it.  Your employer will eventually see the
return on your personal investment.  But you don't have to rely only
on your employer seeing it.  You'll benefit directly, yourself, from
your own efforts, 100 percent of the time.

      This month, I hope you've benefited from this column.  Good luck.
We'll see you next month.

