                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                            MAY 1999

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@aol.com or sbgolob@attglobal.net.
Information about the CBT MVS Tapes can be found on the web, at
http://www.cbttape.org   "Sponsored by NaSPA", and at
http://members.aol.com/cbttape .


HIGHLIGHTS OF CBT TAPE VERSION 420

      Way back in time, when Arnie Casinghino edited the CBT MVS
Tape, I used to drool for a new version, more than a kid would look
forward to a new bike.  What new goodies, tools, and thingies did it
have?  Did Bruce Leland and Steve Smith add more doo-dads to the PDS
command?  (Nowadays, John Kalinich does that.)  Would I get some new
invention that would revolutionize my work?  There's no telling what
I'd find.  Somebody should have taken a few pictures of the smile on
my face, at the very moment I opened any new CBT Tape package.

      Nowadays, when the shoe's on the other foot, I always try and
multiply my own expression of happiness by several thousand, as I
picture everybody else getting a package of new CBT Tape stuff.  I
want to make sure that every single person out there, is as happy
getting a new version, as I used to be.  I think, with this new CBT
Tape Version 420, not too many people will be disappointed.

      Figure 1 contains a summary of all the file changes to Version
420, and you can see at a glance that there's a lot to look at and
explore.  Today, we'll start a quick tour of some of the highlights
(with more next month), and we'll see a lot of new ways to expand our
tool collection and our skills.


WHAT'S REALLY NEW?

      Probably the first thing you'll notice as you look at File 001
(the documentation) of Version 420, is that it's now in mixed case.
Not only does lower case type make the documentation easier to read, it
makes it possible to accurately display Internet addresses, so that
everyone will be able to find them.  The other piece of news about File
001 (currently more than 33000 lines long) is that you can now make a
pds out of it.  On File 004, there is a new ISPF edit macro called
CBTUPDTE, which inserts a whole bunch of IEBUPDTE "./ ADD NAME=" cards
into the CBT Tape Documentation, so you can create a partitioned
dataset with small pieces of the text as separate members.  I hope this
will help more people profit from the wealth of documentation that's in
there.  There are a few more CBT doc manipulation tools on Files 006
and 130.

      As far as new utilities are concerned, it's tough to decide
where to start.  I guess the best place is File 365, where we have a
beautiful new package from Ron MacRae of Amdahl UK, which helps us
better to transmit MVS data over the Internet.

      By now, many of us know that TSO XMIT will take almost any
MVS-based disk data, and will re-package it into convenient 80-byte
records for neat transmission to almost anywhere.  The format for
doing so is TSO XMIT node.userid DATASET(your.dataset)
OUTDATASET(your.seq.FB80.XMIT.output) .  The trick to realize is, that
once you've coded the OUTDATASET parameter, it doesn't matter where
the destination "node.userid" is.  The XMIT command (in that case)
will only reformat the data, but it won't send it out.  You yourself
can now download the reformatted data to a pc, attach it to an
Internet email or FTP it, so it eventually reaches another MVS system
somewhere in the world.  On the MVS receiving end, after they get the
new data, they do a TSO RECEIVE INDATASET(this.new.data) against it.
Problem is, we're never 100 percent sure that not one single byte of
the RECEIVEd data was altered during the physical transmission.

      Experienced users of this method (like me) will know that if
there was some alteration of the data file by the time it got to the
receiving MVS system, the TSO RECEIVE command might not work properly.
But that condition won't catch all the possible errors.  It's only an
indication that there's some header or trailer information missing.
The alteration of a byte or two of the actual data, will give
absolutely no indication that anything's wrong.  You're never really
sure you've gotten absolutely the same data that the sender sent.

      A second problem, or more accurately, a "difficulty" in this
method, is the complexity of coding the TSO XMIT command for many
files, if a lot of them have to be sent.  On the MVS RECEIVEing end,
how do we know that if the sender sent 100-or-so files, one of them
is not missing?  Besides the complexity of doing 100-or-so TSO RECEIVE
commands, one after the other, we're never sure we've actually gotten
all the files across from the sender.

      Ron MacRae's package solves all this.  Ron works for Amdahl UK,
and his unit is responsible for supporting their product called
ObjectSTAR.  Ron's unit has to ship PTFs out over the Internet, and
they have to be accurate, byte-for-byte.  They also have to receive
entire dumps and diagnostic data from customers, over the Internet.
All of it has to be right, with no data altered in the transmission,
otherwise the problem diagnosis might be wrong, and things could be
badly messed up.  Sometimes very large amounts of data have to be
(accurately) sent.

      Ron's solution to this problem is a package called OSTARXMT,
which consists of two REXX execs and an optional assembler program.
Amdahl UK has graciously consented to make this system public, with
the condition that it not be sold, and we owe them a big "thank you".
A lot of people, in a lot of places, are going to get a lot of benefit
from this system.  The two REXX execs, called OSTARXMT and OSTARREC
(for "transmit" and "receive") are self-contained.  Here's how the
system works.

      OSTARXMT is run against one or more datasets that are to be
sent out.  OSTARXMT invokes TSO XMIT "under the covers", for each
dataset to be sent in the package, and bundles the XMIT-format data
for each dataset, so it goes together in one file, one dataset after
another.  Then, to each 80-byte record of the XMIT-format data, eight
bytes of error-checking data are appended at the end, resulting in
records that have 88 bytes of data.  In other words, the dataset made
by OSTARXMT has LRECL 88.  Since this is a special format, a special
MVS suffix is assigned:  ".XMT".

      The single ".XMT" file, possibly containing many datasets, is
now sent out, anywhere in the world, eventually reaching another MVS
system that has the OSTARREC exec installed.  The recipient executes
OSTARREC against the XMT file, and (in the simplest case) gets a series
of TSO RECEIVE INDATASET prompts for each file included in the bundle.
OSTARREC will not work, unless every byte of data is accurate, as
indicated by the 8 error-checking bytes in each record.  After each
TSO RECEIVE command has executed, you are assured that you have,
byte-for-byte, the same data that the sender sent.  Furthermore,
since the data came in one package, none of the individual datasets
is missing.

      Sometimes all of this OSTARXMT activity will create a very large
single package to be transmitted.  Some compression of the package is
needed.  For a first cut, Ron has incorporated the free IBM compression
utility called TRSMAIN into his system.  TRSMAIN is a load module that
can be obtained from the following IBM site (as of this writing):

     ftp://service.boulder.ibm.com/s390/mvs/tools/packlib

When you put the TRSMAIN load module into one of the load libraries on
your system, you indicate its presence by editing the OSTARXMT and
OSTARREC execs to show the library where TRSMAIN is located.   OSTARXMT
will then optionally use TRSMAIN to create a compressed version of the
package to be sent, suffixed by the special suffix:  ".XM1".  When
OSTARREC goes against a file with suffix ".XM1", it will invoke TRSMAIN
(which also has to be present on the receiving MVS system) automatically
to decompress the file, before invoking the rest of the processing on
the resulting ".XMT" file.  In practice, this is very automatic and
convenient, though it may take some time.  You might run it with
TSO-in-batch, so it doesn't tie up your terminal.

      For large files, the error-checking process, done by OSTARXMT
and OSTARREC, might be slow, because of the slowness in REXX program
execution.  To solve that problem, Ron MacRae wrote an assembler
program called OSTAREDC, which does the same error checking at
assembler speed (usually over 95 percent faster).  You edit the two
REXX execs to tell them where to look for the OSTAREDC load module,
and all error checking is then automatically done at super-speed
instead of at REXX speed.  This package is "very cool".

      There are at least two other new "data packaging" related systems
on CBT Tape Version 420.  One has been added to File 171, and is a
package called FX, a sort-of-substitute for IBM's old BDT (Bulk Data
Transmission) package.  FX works on MVS systems that are connectible
using LU 6.2.  The other is the BACKDSNS program that's on Randy Hall's
new file, File 354.  BACKDSNS will look at a list of datasets and
create backup JCL for them.  Randy's new file contains a bunch of other
new goodies too, that are very much worth looking at.


SO WHAT ELSE IS NEW?

      What else is new?  Much more than I can talk about in this
small space, and I'll have to continue next time.  However, there are
some special items that I'd especially recommend trying.  One of them
is a neat system of REXX execs by Willy Jensen of Harders Jensen in
Denmark.  Willy's system can be found on File 349, and allows you to
modify your active ISPF command table entries "on the fly".  This lets
a systems programmer come into a new shop, or just tailor an ISPF
session's "special commands" according to preference, without
affecting anyone else's sessions at all.  The package consists of two
REXX execs, ISPCMDL to list your ISPF session's command table entries,
and ISPCMDU, to update them on the fly.

      Another little gimmick comes from Joerg Berning in Germany
and consists of a REXX exec called LISTVTOC, to do a track extent map
of a disk volume.  The result of the map is ISPF edited and displayed
on your screen, so you can do a CREATE to save it.  LISTVTOC is quick
and neat, but you have to try it for yourself, to see if it is useful
for your own purposes.  Currently, the absolute track values are
displayed in decimal.  I myself would alternatively like to also see
CCHHR and TTR displays too.  Maybe Joerg will add these eventually,
but his program, as it stands, is quite unique, and very useful.
LISTVTOC is on File 344 of the CBT Tape.

      If your shop is small and you don't have a multi-session
manager package, or you want to set up a VTAM multi-session manager
program for yourself, NETSOL is back, fixed to run on OS/390.  NETSOL
used to be on the CBT Tape, many years back.  It was fixed and
spruced up, and now it's available for your use again.  NETSOL is on
File 356 of the CBT Tape.

      I'll continue this topic next time.  Meanwhile, look at Figure 1
for what's new, and go to the Online Home of the CBT Tape, to get what
you want.  The Online CBT Tape files can be accessed from
www.naspa.net, by clicking on "Online CBT".  Good luck and good
hunting!  We'll see you next month.

 *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

Figure 1.   Summary of File Changes in Version 420 of the CBT Tape.


 File Number         Quick Summary of Contents or Changes
 -----------         ------------------------------------

  001           Documentation File is now in mixed case.
  004           CBTUPDTE edit macro - IEBUPDTE separators in File 001.
  006           Tools to manipulate File 001 and improve readability.
  035           Load module library. Latest version of PDS 8.5 etc.
  071           Updated documentation of other tapes. JES3 Tape.
  118           SMP/E SMPPTFIN pre-processing.  Upgrade to COBOL/370.
  120           More of these articles.  (MVS Tools and Tricks)
  130           Former File 006. Loads File 001 into INFO/MVS database.
  134           Greg Price source.  Latest version of REVIEW, etc.
  135           Greg Price load modules.  SHOWMVS load module, etc.
  166           Vinh Vu's collection, updated.
  171           LU 6.2 Bulk Data transmitter. With DITTO, DISASM etc.
  182           PDS package. Version 8.5, update 8, from John Kalinich.
  183           Gilbert Saint-flour collection.  New SHOWMVS program.
  296           Utilities that work with PDS 8.5, and standalone too.
  300           Update to CDSCB for Y2K. With zillion other TSO pgms.
  311           Refresh of Dave Alcock's large utility collection.
  312           Lionel Dyck's ISPF FTP Batch interface, and XMITIP.
  321           Roland Schiradin's COBOL load module analysis pgm.
  338           Gilbert Saint-flour and Larry Williams - P390 tools.
  344           REXX exec from Joerg Berning to do a VTOC track map.
  347           Look at load library and list COBOL compile options.
  348           Pgms to list pds members in alphabetical order.
  349           Change your ISPF command table options on the fly.
  350           JES2 exits. Convert JCL from Mellon Mods to SCHENV=.
  351           Programs to list currently installed LE level.
  354           Randy Hall collection of programs. New. BACKDSNS etc.
  355           KONCAT (concatenation program) from Kaiser Permanente.
  356           NETSOL (VTAM multi-session manager). Works for OS/390.
  357           PDSGEN, PDSLIST programs from Carl Hafner of Steli.
  358           SYSOUT writer from Eric Bielefeld.
  361           Frank Johnston programs. Multi-string scanner, etc.
  362           Frank Johnston load modules.
  363           ISPF/PDF Data Set Name change exit. (ISPF exit 16)
  364           Control Card Subsystem. Works for OS/390.
  365           Error-check multiple-file TSO XMIT pkg from Ron MacRae.
  369           Multiple changes to DSPACE program from Dale Vick.

