                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          OCTOBER 2000

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@attglobal.net and/or sbgolob@aol.com.
The Online CBT Tape web site has its own URL.  However, it can also
be reached from the "Members Only" section of www.naspa.net .


This column is dedicated to the memory of my dear friend Paul G. Davis,
who taught me how to write Edit Macros.


RUNNING MVS ON A PC.

      This month's topic is in a rapidly developing area, and I
cannot consider myself as being thoroughly informed about what has
been happening.  Nevetheless, the ideas of running a mainframe
operating system and/or mainframe-like software on a PC are so
intriguing, that they are well worth reporting on.  Developments have
been springing up in several areas, and I'd like to provide at least
part of a general overview.

      I'll differ a bit this month from my usual format of describing
specific tools or tricks, with an emphasis on free software products
that you can install and use right away.  Although some of the products
I'll describe are free, there simply isn't enough space to both give
an overview of these exciting developments, and to mention a lot of
specifics, too.  Let's begin our discussion with some history.

      The MVS Operating System (the major portion of OS/390) has
traditionally been run on multi-million-dollar "giant" computers, which
are owned or leased by large companies.  The primary purpose of these
computers has been to run the business end of a big company's operation.
Not so many years ago, small companies developing software that runs
under MVS, whether it be system or application software, used to spend
large monthly outlays renting computer time from one, or several, such
big companies.  Many of the smaller software development companies
simply couldn't afford to buy an MVS-capable computer on their own.

      The situation changed drastically with the advent of the P/390
MVS-capable personal computer from IBM.  Under very favorable terms
from IBM, and using a table-top-sized P/390 setup that could approach
10 mips in CPU-power, small software companies and even individuals,
could now keep an MVS machine in their offices, houses, or even
apartments.  IBM encouraged the efforts of these companies through
their Software Developer Program.  And in my opinion, the public has
benefited enormously over the past few years, from MVS software that
was developed on these machines.

      As of this writing, I'm a bit worried about the future.  Because
of new hardware requirements for future versions of OS/390, starting
with Release 11, it's not clear at this time (at least to me) whether
those and later versions of OS/390 will run on P/390 type machines.  I
have heard that IBM is addressing the problem, and we're all anxiously
awaiting the results of their decisions.

      Meanwhile, efforts have led to progress in other directions,
notably the idea of running IBM "big iron" operating systems on a
personal computer which emulates the mainframe hardware using software.
Fast CPUs for the PC, and the availability of humongous amounts of DASD
(disk drive) space very cheaply, have spurred these efforts on.  Today
we'll discuss these developments.  I think this situation will start a
groundswell of curiosity, which will lead to interest, and which will
lead to a lot of action on the part of many people.  I certainly hope
that the current atmosphere will engender a big growth in the need for
people possessing MVS systems programming skills.


FLEX-ES

      The software vendor Fundamental Software Inc. has been, for the
past 10 years, quietly working on an idea whose time is about to come.
Their product, called FLEX-ES, runs on a UNIX server and emulates an
S/390 machine using software.  FLEX-ES supports multi-processing.
Using FLEX-ES, you can run the IBM large scale operating systems OS/390,
VM/ESA, and VSE/ESA as though on a plug-compatible mainframe computer.
Besides plug-compatibility with physical mainframes, the FLEX-ES
arrangement offers other advantages that are not as easily attainable
with "real hardware".

      I once knew of a company which owned a computer that couldn't
run MVS/ESA.  The highest level operating system that this computer
could run, was MVS/XA.  While I was not privy to the financial reasons
why this company could not upgrade its machine (and even if I were, I
wouldn't write about them here), the fact remains that the company was
frozen into running MVS/XA for many years past its time, until Y2K
delivered the coup de grace.  This situation would not have occurred,
if the hardware were emulated by software.  In order to run more new
machine instructions in a FLEX-ES environment, all you'd need is a
software upgrade on your existing UNIX server, not a hardware upgrade.
This would be far easier to accomplish and to budget, than to change
the entire machine.  It would also be easier on CPU-based software
licenses.

      What about peripherals?  FLEX-ES supports emulated old and new CKD
and FBA DASD types, emulated printers, emulated terminals, emulated
TCP/IP network controllers, and emulated 3420 and 3480 tapes.  These
tapes can actually be much longer than the traditional reel and
cartridge tapes, because they are physically supported on devices with
much higher data capacity than an ordinary tape had.  In addition,
FLEX-ES offers its FLEX-ES parallel channel adapter which allows the
attachment of traditional mainframe tape drives, printers, and
communications controllers.  Since FLEX-ES runs on a UNIX server, you
also can create novel combinations and connections between the S/390
activities and native UNIX.

      There remains the question of throughput, and for answers to this,
I'd suggest that you consult Fundamental Software, through its website:
www.funsoft.com .  For costs and capacity questions, I also have to
refer you to them.  It's up to your installation to determine if this
approach is financially feasible.  But the idea and flexibility of
running MVS or OS/390 under hardware emulation, having full commercial
vendor support, and especially for a shop that isn't a giant company, is
so intriguing that it deserves a very thorough look.


HERCULES

      I've got hope for retired or not-currently-employed MVS sysprogs,
for MVS'ers who've been forcibly ported to supporting UNIX machines,
and for others of us who, for some strange reason, want to do mainframe
computing at home.  Now, there's actually a way.  It's a free product
called Hercules, which was specifically designed for non-commercial
use, and which emulates S/390 hardware on a PC.

      Hercules was invented by Roger Bowler, who has been nurturing a
decades-long passion for having a mainframe in his house.  Roger told
me that implementing his wish had to wait, until PC CPUs became fast
enough so that a C-language version of mainframe hardware emulation
became practical.  Roger developed Hercules until it actually started
working well, and he's now turned the everyday proprietorship over to
Jay Maynard.  You can subscribe to the Hercules-390 mailing list (see
Figure 1) to find out more about what's happening.

      Hercules was written in C, to run under Linux.  This, and the fact
that C-language runs on multiple platforms, allows Hercules to be run on
most computers that can be found in a person's house.  Just a bit more
than a week before this writing, a Windows 95/98 port of Hercules was
announced, and the initial reports have indicated that Hercules'
performance under Windows is comparable to its performance under Linux.
I'm starting to get goosebumps, imagining that soon I might be running a
mainframe operating system in my house.

      But there are licensing issues.  Although it is currently
technically possible to run OS/390 Release 2.9 under Hercules, you have
to have a license for OS/390 from IBM, and from my limited
understanding, that isn't cheap at this time.  Many people are actually
opting for running OS/360 (that's right - MVT)!  Yes, MVT (OS/360
Release 21.8) is free.  And people are "hiking out" their old OS/360
sysgen manuals from moldy basements and sharing them with other people.

      How is OS/360 publicly available?  We have to thank Rick Fochtman,
who asked me to announce five years ago, in the CBT Tape documentation,
his request for a copy of the old OS/360 source and sysgen tapes.  One
day, on the IBM-MAIN mailing list, Glen Herrmansfeldt mentioned that he
had an OS/360 source tape, and the ball started rolling.  Jim Marshall
had saved a whole load of OS/360 materials on tape, together with a
full set of microfiche.  Jim sent copies of his OS/360 tapes to Rick
Fochtman, together with all of his microfiche, and Rick produced a
practically complete set of source and machine-readable OS/360 code
on cd-rom.  The rest is history.

      Under Hercules, DASD and tape are emulated by PC disk files, and
it's also possible to attach SCSI peripherals.  Of course, it depends
on what operating system you're running.  Under OS/360, the most recent
DASD type is a 3330.  On OS/390, you can emulate 3390's of all types.
You can run all kinds of standalone utilities under Hercules, even if
you're not running a complete operating system.  Jan Jaeger has written
a standalone editor, called ZZSA, which can be found on File 437 of the
CBT MVS Utilities Tape collection.  ZZSA is very useful under Hercules,
especially when setting it up.  If you're running OS/390, you can run
Standalone DF/DSS dump-restore, Standalone FDR dump-restore, and other
similar software.  Your MVS systems programming skills will be highly
exercised when you set up a Hercules system, because you're configuring
a complete MVS (or MVT) running system in a similar manner to the way
you set up a small "Rescue System".  It's fun.  I'm looking forward.


TACHYON and DIGNUS.

      Even without hardware emulation, there are two products that allow
you to develop mainframe Assembler and C-Language code on an ordinary
PC.  The first is the Tachyon 390 Cross Assembler, which produces
mainframe-executable code and Assembler listings fully compatible with
the IBM High Level Assembler, while running completely on the PC.  The
second is the Dignus Systems/C compiler, which compiles C-language
source code, and which produces Assembler Language code as output.  If
you're restricted to the PC only, you can compile your C code on the
Dignus compiler, and assemble the output with the Tachyon 390 Cross
Assembler.

      David Bond, who produces the Tachyon 390 Cross Assembler, tries to
keep it as completely compatible with IBM's HLASM as possible.  In my
own use of the Tachyon assembler, I've always gotten completely
compatible or exactly identical results, although I suppose it's
possible that others may hit some more borderline cases.  The Tachyon
User Manual describes compatibilities in detail.  But the wonder is that
it all happens on the PC, and that it's so very good!

      David Bond also produces the Tachyon Operating System and the
Tachyon File Tools.  The Tachyon Operating System eliminates the need
for an OS/390 emulator altogether, as it allows you to run and debug
S/390 programs directly on the PC, and it also simulates many OS/390
system services and SVCs, besides simulating the OS/390 instructions.
The Tachyon File Tools are also of much interest, because they include
facilities to both interpret and produce TSO XMIT-format files on the
PC.  The Tachyon File Tools can be licensed separately from the Tachyon
Assembler, and when licensed by themselves, are quite inexpensive.

      Dave Rivers, who produces the Systems/C C-language compiler, has
written compilers practically all of his working life, besides having
considerable mainframe and C-language experience.  Dave Rivers certainly
knows what he's doing.  Both Dave Rivers and David Bond are supporters
of each other's work.  Systems/C has versions which run both on the
mainframe and on the PC.  So if you're coding for the mainframe, and
working on a PC, you can use these products very productively.  Both
products are not free, and I'd recommend that you consult their
respective web sites for further information about them.  I do know that
we can expect a new version of the Tachyon 390 Cross Assembler, to
correspond with HLASM Release 4 for OS/390 2.10.

      So you've seen a glimpse of some very exciting developments in
this age of expanding computer hardware and software technology.  For
mainframe systems programmers, we may be witness to the beginning of a
new Golden Age.  Imagine a time when an MVS-trained sysprog won't have
to be tied to a multi-million-dollar company.  It amazes us to think of
the potential possibilities!  With that in mind, I wish you all the best
of luck, and I hope to see you again next month.


  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 1.   Some URL's for Relevant Internet Sites


   Fundamental Software Inc.  - FLEX-ES  -  www.funsoft.com

   Tachyon Software - Tachyon 390 Cross Assembler
                      Tachyon Operating System
                      Tachyon File Tools       -  www.tachyonsoft.com

   Dignus Systems/C Compiler             -  www.dignus.com

   Hercules-390 Mailing List -
                   To post messages: hercules-390@onelist.com
                   To subscribe:     hercules-390-subscribe@onelist.com

   IBM-MAIN Mailing List -
                   To post messages: IBM-MAIN@bama.ua.edu
                   To subscribe:     listserv@bama.ua.edu

