                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          AUGUST 2000

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@attglobal.net and/or sbgolob@aol.com.
The Online CBT Tape web site has its own URL.  However, it can also
be reached from the "Members Only" section of www.naspa.net .


THE CVT - THE BACKBONE OF MVS

      My approach to understanding computers might be termed
"outside-in".  I'll explain it to you, and I'm sure most of you will
agree why such an approach is needed and practical.  You can begin by
trying to remember what your feelings were, when you first started doing
systems programming work.  If your experience was like mine, it was
something like this:  When we entered this field, we were suddenly
immersed into a complicated mess that already existed, and it was our
job to learn as much as was necessary to survive.

      The reason for that is very simple, when you think about it.
Computer knowledge is a lot of other people's work, thinking, and
debugging.  All of this occurred in the past.  Once somebody built an
operating system, or a utility, or any program written for any purpose,
all subsequent people became users of that operating system, utility or
program.  In other words, even though most of us are called
"programmers", we're really the "users" of other people's programs,
most of the time.

      There's nothing wrong with that.  So why are we called
"programmers" and why are the other people (the "real users") called
"users"?  The answer is because we ADD to the existing computing
program base, and the "users" don't.  We write more programs, to build
on top of what's already there.  Or we install new packages, to create
a new, enhanced programming base on our computing system, for the other
people, the real users, to use.

      At this point, I can explain what I mean by "outside-in".  It
simply means that when I'm trying to understand something in computing,
first I try and see what it does.  I use it.  I get the feel of the
screens and the outputs.  I see what it does to the data files.  I give
it one "test drive", and then another, and another, until I understand
the externals of what it does.  That's what the "outside" is.

      What's the "in"?  It's this.  After I see how the program, or
package, or tool works, I try and find out what makes it tick--WHY it
works.  For that, I have to look into its internal structure, and as
much as is possible in a semi-OCO world, into its programming.  I
reason as follows:  "It DOES work, so something it does, has to MAKE it
work.  It has to make the computer do this stuff in a step-by-step
manner, the same way a building is constructed out of its component
parts."  Then, realizing that the entire picture may be very
complicated, I start trying to find a way to begin.  In other words, I
start by looking for a small piece of the mechanism that I CAN
understand.  It's like trying to break into a house that you're locked
out of.  (In our case, as in the case of a locksmith, it's legal to do
this.)  You look for a loose door, or an open window, so you can get
inside.  That's the "in".

      What relevance does all this have to today's subject?  Today, I'm
going to tell you how to start looking inside MVS.  I'm going to show
you a window that you can climb in, so you can start looking around.
This window is called the CVT, or Communication Vector Table.  Once you
know what the CVT is, and where it is, you're already looking at MVS
from the inside, and not from the outside.


WHAT IS THE CVT?

      The Communication Vector Table (as its name actually tells you
if you understand IBM-ese) is a huge collection of pointers to a lot of
seemingly miscellaneous locations.  Its contents is described by a
macro called CVT, which is in SYS1.MACLIB.  At the beginning of the CVT
macro, IBM actually provides a short explanation as to what the CVT is
for.

      This explanation says:  "The CVT provides the means by which
non-nucleus-resident routines may refer to information in the nucleus
of the control program.  It contains addresses of other control blocks
and tables used by the control program routines."

      Basically, this means that as far as any users of the MVS
operating system are concerned, the CVT is the backbone and spinal cord
of MVS.

      How does a program get to the CVT?  There are two pointers to the
CVT in low storage.  The primary pointer is at virtual location hex 10,
or decimal 16.  The second pointer, far less well-known, is at virtual
location hex 4C, or decimal 76.  Sometimes, if the system is crippled
for some reason, the second location to get to the CVT might be
available, even though the main location at x'10' is damaged.  It's an
extra measure of system security, and it's nice to know about.

      What's in the CVT?  You can find out, by reading the comments in
the CVT macro.  If you're like me, and you've tried doing that, you'll
probably have the same reaction that I did.  You'd be overwhelmed by
the fact that you don't understand very much.  Trust me, that reaction
is natural and normal.  There's a simple reason for it.  In order to
understand all the pointers in the CVT, you have to understand
practically all of MVS, because that's what's being pointed to.

      So instead of being disappointed, you should really be happy.
Why?  Because you've gotten in through the door, and you're now inside
this "mansion of many rooms", that is the MVS operating system.  You've
even got a key to most of the rooms.  Now, you can start exploring the
inside.


USING POINTERS TO GET ALMOST ANYWHERE IN MVS

      The CVT, with its prefix and its extensions, can be likened to a
"room full of address pointers".  Practically every 4 bytes of the CVT
is a pointer to a different virtual storage address.  So, if you're
sitting in a room full of address pointers, the next logical question
is:  How do you use them?  The answer is:  Most of the time, you use
the LOAD instruction (abbreviated "L" in an assembler program).

      The action of the LOAD instruction is very simple.  You point the
LOAD instruction at a four-byte location in storage, and give LOAD the
name of a general register (which holds 4 bytes).  LOAD then puts
whatever 4 bytes of hex values that are at the storage location, into
the general purpose register.  It's very simple.  Just for the record,
I'll mention that the opposite of the LOAD instruction is the STORE
("ST") instruction, which puts the 4-byte contents of a general purpose
register into four bytes of storage.

      Using LOAD, you don't just have to use the four bytes of storage
that it's directly pointing at.  You can also use any four bytes you
choose, at a displacement up to 4095 bytes forward from the location
you're pointing at.  (I'm keeping it elementary here, and I'm not
mentioning how to use an index register in LOAD.)

      Why is the LOAD instruction excellently suited for following
chains of pointers?  Because it allows you to jump from one location
in the computer to another, very simply.  It also accounts for small
displacements off the storage location it is referring to.  I'll try
and explain this a little better.

      Most of the information that the MVS operating system uses, is
stored in moderate-sized chunks of bytes that are together in one
location.  These are termed "control blocks".  The main control block
that is used by any program which uses the MVS operating system, is the
CVT.  An address in the CVT might point to the beginning of another
control block, which contains more address pointers to other control
blocks.  Finally, after following a chain of pointers, you can arrive
at the MVS information you are looking for.  It goes the other way,
too.  Any information that the designers of MVS want you to use, is
almost always pointed to by chains of addresses in control blocks, and
it is almost never referred to by a direct storage location.  Therefore,
to get to any information you want in MVS, there exists some chain of
control block pointers which leads there.  And almost always, the place
to start the search is the CVT.

      So it comes out, that if you want most information in an MVS
system, you have to ask about the chain of pointers, starting from the
CVT, that has to be followed, in order to get there.  And in an
assembler program, following a chain of pointers is done by the LOAD
instruction.

      For example, if you're running a program from TSO, and you want
the program to find out your TSO userid, you ask where the TSO userid
is, and then you ask how to get there.  I'll give you an answer.

      One place the TSO userid is, is in a control block called the
PSCB, in a field called PSCBUSER, that is 0 bytes off the beginning of
the PSCB control block, for 7 bytes.  Question now is, how do you get
to the PSCB?  Answer is:  You start from the CVT, which is pointed to
from virtual location x'10' in low core.  Then you point to the
TSCB-ASCB words, which is at a location for 4 bytes at 0 bytes off the
beginning of the CVT.  At 4 bytes off that location, is a pointer to
your TCB (Task Control Block).  At x'B4' off the beginning of the TCB
is a pointer to the JSCB (Job Step Control Block).  And at x'108' off
the beginning of the JSCB, is the pointer to the location of the PSCB.

      This all looks very complicated, but it isn't really, because
whenever you want the PSCB, you always go there the same way.  And
when you do it with a succession of LOAD instructions in an assembler
program, it's only a succession of 5 instructions.  In a program,
that's very very simple.

      So if you want to get to the PSCB, you always do it the same way,
as follows:  Pick a work register you're not using right now, in
the program.  Say it's Register 3 (called R3).  To get the address of
the CVT, just LOAD R3 with the numeric value x'10'.  Then LOAD R3 with
the value in storage that is 0 bytes off R3 to get to the TCB-ASCB
words.  Then LOAD R3 again with 4 bytes off R3 to get to the TCB.  Then
LOAD R3 again with x'B4' bytes off R3 to get to the JSCB.  And finally,
you LOAD R3 again with x'108' bytes off R3 to get the storage address
of the beginning of the PSCB.  Finally, you can move the 7 bytes that
are at the location R3 now points to (your TSO userid), to wherever you
want.

      In a program, it's just LOAD, LOAD, LOAD, LOAD, LOAD.  Please see
Figure 1 for what the actual instructions look like.

      Each piece of MVS information has its own address.  A large
number of the MVS quantities and values can be reached in this way.
And once you, as a programmer, have gotten to the stage of understanding
this fact, you're now WAY inside MVS.  You're not outside it anymore.


WHAT'S LEFT?

      So what's left for you to do?  Accumulate information!  MVS is a
very large operating system, and it does thousands of different things
in its normal operation.  If you want to write a program that interacts
with one of the things MVS does, you have to know where MVS keeps the
information that particular function is dealing with.  You have to find
out how to get there, and once there, you have to know what you're
allowed to do.  If you're only doing inquiries, and you're not trying
to change anything, you can go practically anywhere, and copy the
information off.  If you're trying to change one of MVS's functions,
you have to be mighty careful.  But at least you can now start looking,
and start doing things.

      At this point (if you're fairly new to MVS internals), you're a
lot farther along than you were, before you started reading this column.
Many working MVS assembler utilities can be found in the enormous, free
CBT Tape collection that is available online, at www.cbttape.org , and
you can examine the different coding examples, so you can see how they
are able to access the system information they need.  I wish you the
best of luck in your endeavors, and I'm looking forward to seeing you
again next month.


   *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 1.   Example of running a chain of address pointers from
            the CVT.

            We want our TSO program to find out the userid it is
            running under.  That information is located in a control
            block called the PSCB, and the PSCB is pointed to, by
            a chain of 4-byte addresses which starts with the CVT.
            Here's how our program gets there, using a succession
            of LOAD instructions into general register 3.


     ---   SNIP   ---
RUNCHAIN L     R3,16               POINT TO CVT. ADDR IS IN LOW STORAGE
         L     R3,0(,R3)           POINT TO TCB/ASCB WORDS, "0" OFF CVT
         L     R3,4(,R3)           POINT TO TCB, "4" OFF TCB/ASCB WORDS
         L     R3,X'B4'(,R3)       POINT TO JSCB. X'B4' OFF CURRENT TCB
         L     R3,X'108'(,R3)      POINT TO PSCB. X'108' OFF THE JSCB
*  -----     Now you're there.  R3 contains the address of the PSCB
*  -----     control block.
         MVC   MSGLINE+13(7),0(R3)   MOVE USERID IN FROM 0 OFF THE PSCB
*                                    AND PLACE IT INTO THE MESSAGE.
         TPUT  MSGLINE,L'MSGLINE   DISPLAY THE WHOLE MESSAGE ON THE TUBE
     ---   SNIP   ---
MSGLINE  DC    CL20'MY USERID IS        '      DEFINE LINE FOR MESSAGE
     ---   SNIP   ---


