                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          JANUARY 2000

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@attglobal.net and/or sbgolob@aol.com.
Information about the CBT MVS Tapes can be found on the web, at
http://www.cbttape.org.    (The link from NaSPA is from the MEMBERS
Page.)


RECENT CBT TAPE NEWS.

      I very well remember my first days and months as an MVS systems
programmer--how I had to struggle with load module concepts, current
system settings, browsing very large sequential PTF files, recovering
deleted pds members, and similar problems.  These are standard
situations that all of us encounter at our work.  I also remember my
early struggles to learn to code in assembler language.  My first
sysprog job, at a very big shop, was made easier because the shop had
bought a large number of optional vendor products for systems
programmers.  But my second job, at a much smaller shop, was full of
handicaps because I didn't have any of those vendor tools any more.

      So struggle I did, until a great event happened.  My teacher,
Jeff Broido, gave me my first CBT MVS Tape.  In my opinion, all MVS
system programmers, veteran or new, ought to know as much as possible
about what the CBT Tape is.  In short, it's a HUGE collection of free
system programmer software tools and other items that are useful in our
trade.  A few of these tools are so unique, they can't be bought.  No
software vendor makes anything like them.  Others of these tools have
their vendor equivalents.  But if you have access to the CBT Tape, the
price is right, and the choice is very big.

      Nowadays, the CBT Tape materials are online, at www.cbttape.org ,
so that possession of a physical tape is no longer essential, to have
access to this amazing collection of tools.  The collection, consisting
of the CBT MVS Utilities Tape and the CBT Overflow Tape, is getting
updated constantly with both new contributions, and updates of old
programs.  Its latest revision level, Version 422, has the largest
number of changes, for one tape update, in the entire history of the CBT
Tape since its inception in 1975.  There are 54 file changes overall,
for V422.  This month, I'll try to tell you about some of them.  But
equally as important, I'd like to mention some new techniques which will
make it easier to use the tape materials.  See Figure 1 for a complete
list of new and changed files for CBT Tape Version 422.


DOCUMENTATION ENHANCEMENTS AND OTHER GENERAL CHANGES.

      Full documentation of the CBT Tape, as always, is on File 001 of
the CBT Tape.  However, File 001 now contains over 36000 lines, and I've
made it a lot easier to handle and maintain.  File 001 can now be
converted into a partitioned dataset, with (as of V422) 934 convenient
chunk-sized separate members.

      Consider the File 001 documentation handling tools that are now
on File 006.  One of them is an assembler program called CBTUPD that I
wrote, which introduces many IEBUPDTE-format ./ ADD NAME=  cards, in
the "right places" of the doc file, File 001, and with "the right member
names".  When you run IEBUPDTE (or PDSLOAD from CBT File 093) against
this updated copy of File 001, you load a partitioned dataset with these
934 members, that are named in such a way that the collating sequence
is maintained, and the entire sequential doc dataset can be put together
again in the right order.  As the tape's proprietor, when I maintain the
tape's documentation, I do it as a pds, and I update the documentation
for each member separately.  You, as a user of the tape, can run the
CBTUPD program, and create the exact same documentation pds, which I
have in my own possession.

      Maintaining the CBT Tape documentation file in this way, has
some important advantages.  One of them is clarity and accuracy in
the description of the contents of each file.  It works as follows:

      If you download some of the CBT Tape's files nowadays, especially
the newer ones, you'll often find a member in them, with a name of the
form @FILEnnn.  For example, on File 365, you'll find a member named
@FILE365.  This member (actually produced by the CBTUPD program), is the
exact detailed file documentation for File 365, that's on File 001, in
the "Documentation Section".  Thus, the actual documentation that comes
in a CBT Tape file, can be repeated over exactly, in File 001 itself.
This system makes it easy for me, as the proprietor, to synchronize the
File 001 documentation to the actual contents of a tape file.  It makes
it easier for the file's users too, because the file's documentation is
more accurate and up-to-date.

      The contributor of each file can also benefit from this new
documentation system.  Instead of inventing his (or her) own
documentation system for a file, the contributor can use this standard
one.  The contributor just has to download the version of the file which
is already on the tape, and update the @FILEnnn member himself (or
herself).  The contributor will thus make sure, personally, that his
description of the material in the file is accurate and complete.

      Of course, File 001, as it's shipped with the tape, looks the
same as it always did, only it's bigger.  This gets us to our second
topic.

      The CBT Tape collections, online as they may be, are still based
on being physical tapes.  I, as proprietor, create physical tapes, and
send them to the webmaster, Sam Knutson.  Sam K, for his part, uploads
all the tape files to the web site, so that the web site contains
exactly the same materials that the physical tape did.  In the past,
when most people got their CBT Tape materials from actual tapes, the
question of tape capacity was a very large issue.  It still is an issue
now, but it's a smaller one.  Simply put, I wouldn't put more
information on a CBT Tape release, than would fit on a single tape
volume.

      In years past, Arnold Casinghino (the founder of the CBT Tape in
1975 and its dedicated proprietor until 1990) sent out CBT Tapes on 2400
foot reels, at 6250 bpi.  The tapes grew and grew, from release to
release.  There's actually a section of the documentation on File 001,
called the "Version Section", which shows the capacity and footages for
past versions of the CBT Tape, as measured with a program we have,
called SS0104.  After a while, at Version 249 of the CBT Tape (July
1985), Arnie measured that the tape was filling up (the materials
occupied over 2000 feet of tape at 6250 bpi), and he started deleting
stuff from it.  Version 249 itself was archived by Arnie, as the last
version before the deletions started, and you can find Version 249 now,
on the CBT Tape web site.  CBT Tape Version 249 contains source for a
wealth of very old user-maintained programs, and is a valuable archive.

      When I took over the reins of maintaining the CBT Tape in 1990,
I didn't want to do wholesale deletions any more.  I let the tape fill
up to about 2300 feet, and then I converted to 3480 (uncompressed)
cartridge distributions and 3600 foot tape reels.  This allowed me to
let the tape grow in size to 3158 feet (Version 404) before something
else had to be done.  3100 feet (as though it were on 6250 bpi tape) is
approximately the upper limit of uncompressed 3480 cartridge capacity.

      At that point, at Version 405, I started a second tape, called
the CBT Overflow Tape, which was planned to contain deletions from the
regular CBT Tape.  However, the first 370-foot deletion didn't really
warrant making a whole second tape, so I started using the CBT Overflow
tape as a "home" for other free MVS-related materials, which had not had
a convenient distribution point before.

      So it came about, that the European G.U.I.D.E. tapes, from the UK,
Germany, Switzerland, and Australia, were placed on the CBT Overflow
Tape.  So was the "ISPF Smoke and Mirrors Tape", an aborted effort from
the SHARE ISPF committee to make their own tape.  When the SHARE MVS
committee itself, decided not to maintain it's tape, I got permission
from them to transplant all of those files to the CBT Overflow Tape,
and to maintain them from there.  Later, OS/360 materials from IBM,
which are public domain, became available to us, and I decided to put
some of them too, on the CBT Overflow Tape.  As we write, I'm preparing
the PL/1 SHARE Tape materials for inclusion on (Version 423V of) the
CBT Overflow Tape.

      In short, both tapes, as uncompressed 3480 cartridges, have now
been filled up with materials.  To adjust to that, I've decided to go to
3480 IDRC, which has over twice the capacity of an uncompressed 3480
cartridge, rather than to start a third uncompressed 3480 tape (which
would have been called CBT Overflow 2, or CO2 for short).  For those
shops that need physical tapes, and can't read 3480 IDRC, we can make a
special accommodation, and split these longer tapes into two.  If you're
in such a situation, please email Sam Knutson at dragon@his.com .

      So the CBT Tapes are continuing to grow.  I'll now conclude this
month's column with a few highlights from the new V422 tape updates.


SOME USEFUL NEW FILES ON CBT422.

      Files 050 and 051 are new and different files, which are helping
users of the CBT Tapes to adjust to the Internet era.  These are files
which contain only URL's of sites on the Internet.  File 050 has some
sites from which you can obtain free downloads.  File 051 has URL's of
a few vendor sites which may be of interest.

      The reason why I started File 050 was because of some useful free
MVS products like TASID from Doug Nadel.  TASID is a multi-purpose
multi-utility and monitor program that runs under ISPF.  As useful as
TASID is, I can't put it on the CBT Tape.  That's because Doug Nadel is
an ISPF developer who works for IBM, and all the free stuff he's written
on IBM equipment, still belongs to IBM and is subject to whatever
ownership and restrictions they have.  So I made a file with a bunch of
URL's, and you can use those URL's to go and download TASID and the
other useful programs for yourselves.  Some other useful things were not
free, but were vendor products.  So I split them off, and made File
051 just for them.

      Some other notable new files on CBT Tape V422 are as follows:
File 391 from Robert Ngan, which is TRACE390, is a program to trace the
execution of other programs.  File 382 is a large collection of
utilities from Paul Gillis.  File 368 is similarly a big collection of
utilities from James Williams of Atlanta.  KSDSPACE, on File 394, is a
very useful program from Jan Jakubek of Toronto.  FINDSTR on File 396
from Scott Hawley, is a REXX exec that invokes ISRSUPC to find all
occurrences of a string in a dataset, directly as a line command from
ISPF 3.4.  Rob Scott, the author of MXI, an ISPF-based monitor program,
has included MXI and many of his other programs, on Files 409 thru 412.
Ashley Street has contributed many programs from his FADH ("Flogging a
Dead Horse") collection.  Ashley's stuff is on File 413.  Thierry
Falissard's large collection is on File 432.  Steve Bacher's utilities
are on File 431.  Mark Zelden's collection is on File 434.  And Frank
Clarke's REXX execs are on Files 433 (VB-255) and 435 (FB-80, converted
by David North).  If I left some other good new files out, it was
completely unintentional.  There are a lot of them.

      Sam Knutson deserves a big "thank you" for all his work in
getting the CBT Tape web site together.  You can email Sam K at
dragon@his.com , to tell it to him personally.

      I sincerely hope that you'll get very much benefit from the new
files on the CBT Tape, as well as from the other files that are there.
I can personally tell you that this collection is half my own career.
(If you're a regular reader of this column, you already know that!)  In
any case, I wish you all a Happy 2000, and I'm looking forward to seeing
you again next month.


   *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 1.   List of files on the CBT MVS Tape that were changed
            for Version 422.  Some of the files are completely new,
            and others have had slight or moderate changes made to
            them.  All in all, the changes have been very
            substantial, and together, they constitute the largest
            single positive increment between two consecutive tape
            versions, in the entire history of the regular CBT Tape.


FILE NO.    DESCRIPTION OF THE OVERALL CONTENTS OF THE FILE
-------     -----------------------------------------------

File 006:   Collection of Utilities to manipulate File 001 doc
File 035:   LOAD MODULE file - Quick install of useful programs
File 039:   CITIBANK - SMF 14-15 pgm, and IPOUPDTE modification
File 050:*  Internet URLs for Free Downloads
File 051:*  Internet URLs for some Relevant Vendor Sites
File 094:   DAF from Mike Cleary - Dataset Audit Facility
File 102:   TAPESCAN program - Frank Pajerski version
File 120:   Sam Golob's "MVS Tools & Tricks" articles
File 129:   Shared DASD Checkpoint mod - XA and OS/390
File 134:   Greg Price Utility collection - REVIEW, etc.
File 135:   Greg Price Load Module library
File 147:   ARCHIVER  All your non-VSAM datasets to 1 VSAM file
File 155:*  Dave North's REXX execs - go VB-255 to FB-80 etc.
File 161:   Jim Marshall - ISPF interfaces to utilities
File 171:   DITTO, TAPEMAP, SMFUTIL, TPX, FX, SUTL (no BLP req)
File 172:   David Cartwright's collection of Utilities
File 182:   PDS Command Package - Version 8.5
File 183:   Gilbert Saint-flour's collection - SHOWMVS etc etc
File 244:   UK GUIDE Tape Supplement - 1993A
File 247:   Broadcast Manager Utilities to manage SYS1.BRODCAST
File 268:   REXX function package to access VSAM files
File 291:   CPU Instruction Speed monitor
File 299:   TAPEMAP program - Reads tape files in many formats
File 300:   Jim Marshall's enormous collection of TSO programs
File 312:   FTPBATCH, XMITIP - others from Lionel Dyck
File 321:   COBOL Analyzer from Roland Schiradin & post prcessor
File 322:   TSO SLEEP programs (like the VM ones)
File 343:   A VTOCLIST program - Peter Havercan & John Kalinich
File 348:   Programs to list a PDS directory in order
File 352:   INTEL large collection of utilities
File 361:   Frank Johnston Utilities - CXYPSCAN, ZZRELINK
File 362:   Frank Johnston Utilities - Load Library
File 368:   Utility collection from James Williams
File 372:*  DYNALLOC Program from Ken MacKenzie
File 382:   Paul Gillis utilities collection
File 391:*  TRACE390 Instruction Trace Program from Robert Ngan
File 393:*  RACFGRPS exec from Robert Lamerand
File 394:*  KSDSPACE program from Jan Jakubek
File 395:*  CATIND exec to do bulk cataloging for a new system
File 396:*  FINDSTR exec to invoke ISRSUPC automatically in 3.4
File 397:*  PACK and UNPK execs to do numeric conversions
File 398:*  Generate system macro invocations more simply
File 404:   TSSO for OS/390
File 409:*  Rob Scott's MXI monitor package - FB-80 members
File 410:*  Rob Scott's MXI monitor package - load modules
File 411:*  Rob Scott's utilities - source code and FB-80
File 412:*  Rob Scott's utilities - load modules
File 413:*  Ashley Street's FADH Utility collection
File 414:*  Convert printouts from machine control to ANSI
File 431:*  Steve Bacher's utilities, packages, and offerings
File 432:*  Thierry Falissard's selected programs and stuff
File 433:*  Frank Clarke's collection of REXX execs, etc.
File 434:*  Mark Zelden collection of Utilities and execs
File 435:*  Frank Clarke's stuff FB-80-ized by Dave North (F155)


An asterisk (*) next to the file number, denotes a completely
new file for CBT Tape Version 422.


