                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                           JUNE 2000

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@attglobal.net and/or sbgolob@aol.com.
The Online CBT Tape web site has its own URL.  However, it can also
be reached from the "Members Only" section of www.naspa.net .


COPYING TAPES

      As a longtime systems programmer who has talked with many of my
peers over the years, I am puzzled by some people's attitudes about the
copying of tapes.  I have heard many opinions about the subject--some
of them very knowledgeable, and some of them surprisingly ignorant.
When asked the question, "how do you copy a tape?" people have actually
answered:  "You use IEBGENER."  I'd ask in reply: "But what if the tape
has 500 files on it--what do you do then?"  And I've gotten a blank look
in return.  Fortunately, most of the people in our field do not answer
this question in this way.

      Actually, before you can accurately copy a tape, you should know
what is on it--how many files, standard labeled (SL) or non-labeled
(NL).  Is it an MVS tape, or a DOS/VSE tape, or does it come from some
other kind of computer system?  You should know how to use some tools
which can tell you accurately and exactly what kind of files the tape
contains, and what they look like.  Today, we'll talk about some
particulars from the subject of accurately copying tapes, and we'll
recommend some tools for this purpose.  Of course, after the tape has
been copied, you'd like to check and make sure of two things:  first,
that the copy was complete--all the files have been copied, and second,
that it was accurate--the copy is byte for byte identical with the
original.


Some Fundamentals

      Tapes contain sequential blocks of data, one block after another.
These blocks are organized into logical files.  And the files are
separated one from another.  The separator string which separates one
file from another, is called a "tape mark".  A tape mark is generated
by the tape hardware.  It makes a big difference if a tape is "labeled",
or "non-labeled".  A labeled tape has each file of data surrounded by
what can be termed "label files", or labels, for short.  A non-labeled
tape has its files separated only by tape marks, with no label files at
all.  The structure of data files on a tape is very simple, but it is
crucial that it be thoroughly and clearly understood.  See Figure 2 for
a simple diagram of how files are arranged on a tape.

      To understand the structure of files on a tape, it is necessary to
have some tools, which can generally be termed "tape mapping programs".
I can tell you about some free tape mapping programs, such as TAPESCAN
and TAPEMAP, which I've found highly useful.  Also, some of the vendors,
such as SAS, have tape mapping tools.  IBM's DITTO programs, both for
MVS and VSE, can be used to map and copy tapes.  As frequent readers of
this column already know, I'd rather write about the free programs,
which can be obtained and used by anyone without restriction.  If you
know how to use a free tool, you can use it anywhere, and you can always
take that skill with you to any shop.

      Besides mentioning some specific tape mapping programs, such as
TAPESCAN and the various TAPEMAP programs, I have to talk about the CBT
MVS Utilities Tape, which contains the source code (and load modules)
for these programs.  The CBT Tape is a huge collection of system
programmer "goodies" from all over the world.  Physically, the
collection is on several tapes.  The CBT MVS Utilities Tape, and the CBT
Overflow Tape are the two current volumes.  There is also an old version
of the CBT Tape (Version 249) from July 1985, which contains old
programs whose source code would otherwise be hard to find today.  All
of the files on these tapes can now be downloaded from the CBT Tape web
site, which has its own URL, but which can be reached from the "Members"
portion of the NaSPA web site as well.  After discussing the mechanics
of tape file transfer, I'll look at the operation of one specific
program which can copy tapes conveniently.  Please see Figure 1 for a
list of several free tape mapping and copying programs.


How Do Tape Copying Programs Work?

      Tape copying consists of reading a block of input tape data into a
data buffer, and then writing the contents of the buffer out to an
output tape.  When writing a tape copying program, you must take care to
position both tapes appropriately, and to make sure to write the proper
tape marks, (and labels, if the output tape is Standard Labeled).

      Effective tape mapping and tape copying programs usually use the
EXCP or BSAM access methods.  While it is perfectly OK to write a tape
copying program using QSAM, you get more generality to handle irregular
tapes, using either EXCP or BSAM.  Furthermore, using both EXCP and
BSAM, it's possible to copy up to 64K blocks of tape data in one CCW,
but with QSAM, you can't--32K is the QSAM limit.  EXCP is the more
elementary and straightforward of the two methods.  In fact, at least
one of the free programs mentioned in Figure 1, TAPESCAN, which uses
BSAM for reading tape input, in truth only employs the BSAM for some
extra window dressing and control, but the actual input I/O is really
being done by EXCP under the covers.  So it's important for us to learn
something about how to do EXCP for tapes.

      EXCP (Execute Channel Program) can be pictured as the "assembler
language" for I/O.  On the other hand, the IBM Access Methods, BSAM,
QSAM, and the like, can be pictured as higher-level languages for I/O.
Tape files, being sequential files exclusively, are simpler to handle
than disk files, so the EXCP to handle tape files will also be quite
simple.  You only have to know a few pieces of information, and soon
you'll be able to study and write tape EXCP programs like a pro.

      The EXCP process for tapes moves data to or from a tape, and/or
positions a tape to wherever you want it.  Control of all this is done
by "channel programs".  A channel program consists of a succession of
"channel command words", or CCWs, that are chained to each other.  The
"chaining" is done by turning on a "chaining bit" in the third operand
of the channel command word.  Look at Figure 3 to see the structure of
channel command words.  To write a tape EXCP operation, you just have to
specify a succession of one or more appropriate channel command words,
then include these CCWs into a larger control block (that you construct)
called an IOB, or Input Output Block, and then you EXCP the IOB.  That's
all there is to it, except for a few details, which we'll now touch on
briefly.

      To specify any I/O operation in an assembler program, you always
need a DCB macro, to define the ddname of the file you're looking at.
To set up EXCP access to the DCB for a file, all you really have to
specify is MACRF=E.  Besides that, you can just specify the DDNAME
keyword parameter.  With EXCP there are no RECFM or BLKSIZE parameters
to worry about.  All of that information is specified in the CCWs that
are executed, and in any deblocking that your program itself does.

      In the generalized tape programs we're looking at, you might also
want to do some manipulation of JCL DD parameters inside the program,
such as forcing the operating system to ignore Standard Labels, even if
you didn't specify BLP in the LABEL parameter of your JCL.  This type of
miracle is done by changing the Job File Control Block (JFCB), which
contains all your JCL DD information after your program starts
executing.  To give your program access to this JCL information, you
have to set up an Exit List for your DCB, and point to it with the EXLST
keyword parameter of the DCB macro.  After you execute a RDJFCB macro,
this exit list will contain an accessible image of all your JCL in the
DD card.

      To make all this work, just set up an exit list address in your
program, which consists of a fullword address in your program that
starts with an X'87' character, followed by a 24-byte (3 character)
address of a 176-byte area that you specify in you program, to hold all
of the JFCB information.  To copy (for any use) all the DD information
into your 176-byte area, just execute a RDJFCB macro pointing to the
DCB.  You can then change any DD information, and this is later honored
if you don't do a regular OPEN of the file, but you do a special type of
OPEN, called OPEN TYPE=J.

      Now let's look at the EXCP again.  The EXCP operation reads or
writes data between the device and your computer storage.  Sometimes an
EXCP operation will just position the tape, but in any case, this
operation takes a long time, compared to the short time needed in
executing computer instructions.  In order to stop execution of your
program until the I/O operation completes, you have to issue a WAIT
macro after you issue the EXCP macro.  If an EXCP is followed by a WAIT
macro, the EXCP "knows" how to inform the WAIT macro that the I/O
operation has successfully been completed.  This communication is done
through a fullword area you specify in your program, called an ECB
(Event Control Block).  Just specify an ECB as DC F'0', label it, make
sure the IOB knows where it is, before you do the EXCP, and say WAIT
ECB=this label.  The next instruction in your program should be a TM of
the first byte of the ECB to equal X'7F'.  If all these bytes aren't on,
in other words, if they're not all ONES, then you've got an error
situation.  Otherwise, all is well, and you can now go to the buffer and
read the data (on a read) or you can know the data was written from the
buffer to the tape (on a write).  Cool.  It really works.

      This all may seem complicated, but you can study some real code,
and see this process in action.  Probably one of the simplest tape
copying programs I know of, is the COPYMODS program from File 229 of the
CBT MVS Tape, which makes from one to 16 exact copies of an existing
tape, end to end.  I'll conclude this article with at step-by-step look
at the basic operations of the COPYMODS program.


The COPYMODS program.

      The COPYMODS program makes a full copy of a tape, from one end
to the other.  It doesn't matter if the tape is Standard Labeled (SL)
or Non-Labeled (NL)--COPYMODS will copy the entire contents of the
input tape, to as many as 16 output tapes.  To simplify our explanation,
let's assume that there's only one output tape.  The input ddname is
called IN, and the output ddname is called OUT1.  You can obtain the
source for the COPYMODS program from File 229 of the CBT MVS Tape, by
looking at location

ftp://ftp.cbttape.org/pub/cbttape/cbt/CBT229.zip .

      To begin, COPYMODS opens the IN file and the OUT1 file.  Since
COPYMODS does not use OPEN TYPE=J, but a regular OPEN, it requires that
you specify LABEL=(,BLP) in the ddnames IN and OUT1.  Then the program
begins copying files.  It reads the first block of data into a 64K
buffer that's right inside the program, and it writes that data out to
the output tape, continuing until the first file has been completely
read.  When the first tape mark is encountered on input, COPYMODS
writes a tape mark to the output tape.  All of this is done with EXCP
instructions, each pointing to an IOB that contains the correct CCW
chains.  When two consecutive tape marks are encountered, COPYMODS
writes a second tape mark to the output tape, and closes both tape
files.  It's a very simple operation.

      I've recently "taught" COPYMODS not to stop at every double
tape mark.  Sometimes, when copying an SL tape, there's a situation
in which two consecutive tape marks is normal, and I detect that.
This arises when a file with no data, such as an IEBCOPY backup of a
pds with no members, is written to a Standard Labeled tape.  The data
pattern for an SL tape is normally:  HDR1 label, HDR2 label, TM, data,
TM, EOF1 label, EOF2 label.  If there's no data in the SL file, the
two TM's become consecutive.  So I programmed into COPYMODS, that if
it "sees" a HDR1 and/or a HDR2 followed by 2 consecutive TM's, then
it should not stop, but it should go on and look for EOF's or EOV's
in the input tape.

      I hope that you've gotten an appreciation of tape copying from
this month's column.  As one practical application, you can use my new
version of the COPYMODS program to make real copies of virtual tapes
that are in an IBM Virtual Tape box.  The Virtual Tape box has a
provision to do a logical "eject" of a tape that's inside it, but then
the "tape" that's inside the box gets deleted.  If you use COPYMODS to
make the copy of the "inside tape" to an outside tape, then you won't
have to actually delete the "inside" tape.  Here's a real, practical use
for the COPYMODS program in this modern day and age.  Good luck.  See
you next month!


   *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 1.   A Selection of TAPE Copying and TAPE Mapping Programs
            which are free.  Information on General Function is
            according to the level of the program on Version 424
            of the CBT MVS Utilities Tape.



  Program Name      Where Obtained      General Function


  COPYMODS          File 229 of CBT     Can make from 1 to 16
                    Tape                exact copies of a tape,
                                        in a single run.  Can now
                                        copy DOS/VSE tapes and
                                        tapes with leading tape
                                        marks.  Can copy tapes
                                        with blocks up to 64K.

  COPYFILE          File 316 of CBT     Can select files from one
                    Tape                standard labeled (SL) tape
                                        and copy the selected files
                                        to another SL tape.  Has
                                        sophisticated control card
                                        scheme to select the files
                                        to be copied.  Can copy up
                                        to 64K blocks of data.

  COPYSLNL          File 316 of CBT     Can select files from one
                    Tape                standard labeled (SL) tape
                                        and copy them to a non-
                                        labeled (NL) output tape,
                                        using the same control cards
                                        that COPYFILE uses.  Can
                                        copy up to 64K blocks of
                                        data.

  COPYNLNL          File 316 of CBT     Can select files from one
                    Tape                non-labeled (NL) tape to
                                        another NL tape, using the
                                        same control cards that
                                        COPYFILE has.  Can copy up
                                        to 64K blocks of data.

  CT                File 316 of CBT     Can copy one complete tape
                    Tape                to another, under operator
                                        console control.  Can do
                                        multi-volume copies.  Can
                                        verify the copy, if it was
                                        a single volume.  Recently
                                        fixed to handle 64K blocks
                                        of data.

  TAPESCAN          File 102 of CBT     Shows details of what is on
                    Tape                a tape.  Shows tape label
                                        contents and first 100 bytes
                                        in hex, of first blocks of a
                                        tape record.  Maps SL files of
                                        an SL tape.  Not fixed yet to
                                        handle 64K byte blocks; only
                                        good until 32K byte blocks.
                                        Can be used to copy one tape
                                        to another.  Handy for tape
                                        diagnosis.

  TAPEMAP           File 299 of CBT     Shows label information of
                    Tape.  Another      MVS tapes.  Second report shows
                    version is on       details of the contents of many
                    Leonard Woren's     formats of unloaded files, such
                    web site.           as IEBCOPY, IEBUPDTE, and the
                                        CBT973-compressed CBT Tape files
                                        themselves.

  TAPECOPY          File 174 of CBT     This program can copy tapes and
                    Tape.  This pgm     has many options to handle bad
                    is from Aron        or damaged tapes.  A unique
                    Eisenpress.         feature of this program is its
                                        ability to create a SL tape
                                        from an NL tape, supplying a
                                        standard format for a label,
                                        from parm information.  So
                                        far, can only handle up to 32K
                                        blocks.


   *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 2.   How files are arranged on IBM MVS Standard Labeled
            (SL) and on Non-Labeled (NL) tapes.  Let's say each
            tape contains two files, and they don't fill the
            volume completely.


   SL tape:  VOL1 label, HDR1 label, HDR2 label, TM, File 1 data, TM,
             EOF1 label, EOF2 label, TM, HDR1, HDR2, TM, File 2 data,
             TM, EOF1, EOF2, TM, TM.

   NL tape:  File 1 data, TM, File 2 data, TM, TM.


   IBM References:  DFSMS/MVS  Using Magnetic Tapes   (SC26-4923)
                    DFSMS/MVS  Using Data Sets        (SC26-4922)


   *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *


Figure 3.   Structure of a Channel Command Word (CCW).


            A CCW is eight bytes in length, and the IBM assembler
            "understands" the CCW instruction, with four operands,
            without its being a macro.

            A CCW, defined by a CCW instruction, looks like:

 label     CCW  one byte command code,
                3-byte address of buffer,
                flag bits for chaining, etc. (2 bytes)
                length of data to be moved (up to 64K - 2 bytes)

           Command codes can be found in the IBM "yellow card"
           pocket reference.  Some command codes for tapes are:

           X'02'   Read
           X'01'   Write
           X'07'   Rewind
           X'1F'   Write Tape Mark
           X'03'   No Operation
           X'37'   Forward Space Block
           X'3F'   Forward Space File
           X'27'   Back Space Block
           X'2F'   Back Space File

