                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                         FEBRUARY 2000

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982


Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@attglobal.net and/or sbgolob@aol.com.
Information about the CBT MVS Tapes can be found on the web, at
http://www.naspa.net.    (Go from the NaSPA Home Page to "What's New",
from there to "Member's Web Site", and then to "Online CBT".)


ASSEMBLER MACRO COLLECTIONS - PART 1

      As a longtime practitioner in this field, it is my opinion that
Systems Programmers should know how to program.  Specifically, we
should know something about programming in the mainframe Assembler
Language.  Assembler programming knowledge provides multiple benefits
for the technician and the shop.  It'll help you to better diagnose
problems--you can read and understand machine code in load modules.
(I first learned what a spin loop was, by looking at the looping code
instructions in a system module.)  It'll also help you to write, or
modify, extra system utilities that are very necessary in doing our
jobs.  IBM doesn't provide us with quite enough tools to make us
completely comfortable.  We all know that we need more tools to do our
normal work, than IBM provides us with.

      There are various degrees of skill and involvement in assembler
programming.  We systems programmers don't have to be the greatest
programming experts, but we should be able to write a utility program,
fix it, and write any system exits that are required or useful for the
shop.  On the other hand, experienced developers of system programs, who
spend their entire days developing code, have different requirements.
They need a more organized development environment, with their own
appropriate tools in place.  The most frequently used tools in an
assembler programming development environment are collections of macros.

      Every assembler programmer, at any skill level, needs to know
about macro instructions.  Macros are pieces of user-written source code
that are invoked by the programmer as though they were single
instructions.  Prototype macro definitions, which contain the code to
accomplish specific tasks, are pre-coded and placed in macro libraries,
or lie "internally" in the program itself, between MACRO and MEND
instructions.  At assembly time, the assembler looks at any
"instruction" in the source code that isn't an actual instruction, and
checks to see if it is a macro.  If the assembler can "find" a macro
definition prototype, and indeed, the "instruction" is a macro, the
assembler proceeds to look at the macro definition prototype and expands
the single macro instruction call into one, or many actual instructions.
All this is for the purpose of accomplishing a given action,
repetitively, in a simple way.

      What can be done by coding a macro in an assembler program?
For example, you could code one macro, and print a message line.  Or
you could code a one-line macro to do all the preparation to start, or
finish, the execution of a program.  A macro can be used to accomplish
any (simple or complicated) task in an easy way, as long as the macro
definition prototype is pre-coded, in advance, and you've pointed your
assembler JCL to the library containing this definition, using the
SYSLIB DD statement.  Macros make the life of an assembler programmer
much simpler, because by the skillful use of macros, you don't have to
repeatedly code all the instructions necessary to accomplish repetitive
tasks.  You just code an execution of one macro, over and over.

      In the MVS Operating System, macro invocations in assembler
programs are a way of life.  Access to MVS system facilities is often
provided by IBM through documented macro calls.  The macro definitions
necessary to support these system facilities, are provided by IBM in
partitioned datasets known as macro libraries.  SYS1.MACLIB and
SYS1.MODGEN are the most generally used macro libraries, but some
specialized IBM products have their own separate macro libraries as
well.  To use these IBM macros, their macro libraries have to be
concatenated into the SYSLIB DD statement of your assembly JCL.

      Assembler programmers have also created many of their own user
macros, which perform repetitive functions that they don't want to code
over and over again.  One such example is a pair of user macros which
takes care of the "housekeeping" involved in program entry and program
exit.

      IBM's SAVE and RETURN macros, which help us to simplify these
functions, aren't specialized enough to automatically establish the
program's base registers and load them properly.  Or, for writing a
re-entrant program, we'd want such macros to GETMAIN a save area and
FREEMAIN it afterwards.  (GETMAIN and FREEMAIN are macros themselves,
provided by IBM to obtain and free some main storage for a program's
use.)  Therefore many programmers have written their own macros to do
this housekeeping job the way they'd like.  I've seen pairs of
user-written macros called ENTERR and EXIT, or PROLOG and EPILOG, and
other similar sets, which do this job nicely, better than the
IBM-provided macros do.

      I was once chairman of the SHARE Assembler committee.  This group
had the specific function of putting pressure on IBM to improve their
Assembler H program, which at that time was IBM's standard Assembler
for MVS and VM.  Greg Mushial of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center
(called SLAC) had written about 50 enhancements to Assembler H.  We
(the users) and SLAC itself, wanted IBM to take these improvements over
and support them.  The eventual result was that IBM listened (after our
long campaign) and created the High Level Assembler (HLASM) which
incorporated Greg's enhancements, and which is their standard assembler
today.

      In the course of those committee meetings, I had the occasion to
talk to some high-powered Assembler developers, from both IBM and other
commercial vendors.  After one meeting, I took a walk with two authors
of very famous products.  The single topic of conversation which struck
me the most, was that they talked about the absolute necessity of
creating a good set of macros for themselves, to use in their
development efforts.

      My own experience in programming, not as heavy as theirs, gave
rise to a different view.  If I'm modifying some program, not writing
my own, I'm happy to work with the macros (if any) that the original
author of the program used.  These macros are part of the backbone of
this author's code; I'm only modifying some particulars.  Therefore,
I don't usually want to change any of the basic program structure, and
I'll normally leave his macros the way they are.  I just might invoke
them a few more times, if that's necessary for the job I have to do.

      The common thread in both these points of view, is that you have
to know how to invoke macros, and you should have a good concept of how
they work.  If you're a developer, you might have to write a set of
macros for yourself.  If you work with someone else's code and use
already-written macros, you still have to understand what they're good
for, and how to properly invoke them.  Today, I'm not going to talk
about how to write macros, and how their internals work, using the
conditional assembly.  Carmine Cannatello's new book, "Advanced
Assembler Language and MVS Interfaces" (John Wiley - ISBN 0-471-36176-3)
has an excellent chapter on how to write macros.  Rather, I'll describe
some nice collections of user-written macros which people have written,
and we'll get a better idea about what these collections can do for us.


WHERE TO FIND MACROS

      Most of the non-IBM macros you can find, are user-written.  An
enormous collection of user-written MVS software can be found on the
CBT MVS Utilities Tape and the CBT Overflow Tape, which have an online
web site available for downloads.  You can get to the "Online CBT Tape"
web site, by starting from the "Members Area" of the NaSPA home page:
www.naspa.net.  The CBT Tapes, as I'll refer to both of them, contain
large amounts of assembler language source code, which in turn include
many assembler macros that you can look at, learn from, and use.

      In addition, most IBM products have been written using some
specialized "internal user macros".  Although the typical IBM macros
that we normally use, are in SYS1.MACLIB and SYS1.MODGEN, some less
common macros that were used for actual IBM product development, are
available to us as "IBM Private Macros".

      Where are the IBM Private Macros?  If you obtain machine-readable
"Optional Materials" from IBM for a product, which contain source code
for some of its programs, you'll find that one or more of the files on
these tapes contain macros which were used in the development of that
particular product.  To spot a file containing macros, look for one
file which contains a lot of wildly different member names, as opposed
to files containing member names that are mostly very similar to each
other.  Today, you can't obtain as many of these IBM Private Macros as
in the past.  That's because many of IBM's products are now "OCO"
(distributed to customers as "Object Code Only") and IBM doesn't let
you see the source code any more.  Nevertheless, quite a lot of the IBM
Private Macros are still available today, especially for older
products.

      Between this month and next month, we'll examine some different
types of user-written macros that are commonly available, and we'll
show you what they're for.  The types we'll mention are "Structured
Macros", "Internal Macros", "Entry and Exit Macros", and some other
types.  We'll also show you some miscellaneous collections of macros
you can use for various purposes.  Once you see a few examples of the
enormous jobs that macros can do, you'll understand, by yourself, that
there are many more possibilities.


STRUCTURED MACROS

      Dan Snyder has been developing assembler code for almost 30
years, and he's recently donated the entire collection of the assembler
macros he's written, to the CBT Tape.  Dan's collection will soon
appear on the CBT Tape as File 438.  We'll end this month's column with
a short description of Dan's "structured macros", and we'll continue
next month with a description of some other macro types and macro
collections.

      In addition to Dan Snyder's structured macros, there are other
collections of structured macros on the CBT Tapes.  The Clemson
University Structured Macros collection is on Files 107 and 108 of the
CBT MVS Utilities Tape.  And the HAL collection of structured macros,
from Yale University, is on File 188 of the CBT Overflow Tape.

      All of us probably know what "Structured Programming" means for
higher level languages.  Structured Programming is a way of keeping
your code segmented and neat, often using some standard programming
constructs, such as IF-THEN-ELSE segments and DO loops.  In Structured
Programming, you never branch out of one segment of code, into the
middle of another segment.  Writing programs in a structured manner
makes them easier to debug and test, because many bugs can be isolated
to a small segment of a large program.

      By it's normal nature, Assembler Language code is rather
free-form.  Practically speaking though, it's a good idea to code
Assembler in segments, and not to branch the code out of the segments.
But you don't have to.  It's a completely different story to make an
Assembler Language program look like a higher level language program,
by coding IF-THEN-ELSE statements and DO loops, yet keeping the control
of knowing what each instruction is doing.

      Dan Snyder's structured macro system makes it possible for an
Assembler Language program look like a high level language program,
while retaining the fine-grained control that an Assembler programmer
is used to.  Dan has written macros called IF, ENDIF, ELSE, ELSEIF,
ENDELSE, DO, ENDO, ELSEDO, THENDO, FIRST, ENDFIRST, AFTER, ENDAFTER,
NEXT, EVERY, and EDIT.  These macros allow the coding of true
Structured Programming constructs in Assembler programs, while retaining
the traditional Assembler control and efficiency.

      A very simple example of the use of Dan Snyder's IF and ENDIF
macros can be seen in Figure 1.  You'll notice that the code generated
by these macros is very efficient.  If you're used to coding in
Assembler, and you also have familiarity with structured coding in
higher level languages, you'll definitely be interested in looking at
this set of macros.

      In this same file, File 438, you can also find Dan Snyder's
collection of macros to allow you to code an assembler program and
make it look like a COBOL program.  This second macro collection will
help former COBOL programmers migrate their skills to the Assembler
arena.  Very interesting, curious, and helpful stuff, indeed!

      Before Version 423 of the CBT Tape will be released, you can
download File 438 from:

    ftp://ftp.cbttape.org/pub/cbttape/adhoc/CBT438.zip  .

After the official release of Version 423 of the CBT Tape, File 438
will be available at:

    ftp://ftp.cbttape.org/pub/cbttape/cbt/CBT438.zip  .

      Next month, we'll continue our discussion of user-written
assembler macro collections further.  I sincerely hope that this
material will broaden your horizons.  See you then!

   *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

Figure 1.   A simple illustration of the effect of Dan Snyder's
            IF and ENDIF macros.

            Dan Snyder wanted to make his IF macro as simple to
            use, but as general as possible.  Therefore, its four
            operands are very close in format, to the assembler
            code that they generate.  Its first operand is any
            instruction that sets the condition code.  Its next
            two operands are the first operand and second operand
            of the instruction (as in the Principles of Operation
            manual).  Finally, its fourth operand is whatever
            letter(s) you'd add to the "B" to make a branch
            mnemonic.  For example, you'd code an E for the
            fourth operand, and the IF macro will generate a "BE"
            mnemonic instruction, or its functional equivalent.
            It works as follows:


This is an example of how you code Dan Snyder's IF macro:

                PRINT GEN                DISPLAY MACRO EXPANSIONS
                IF      (CLC,FIELDA,FIELDB,E),THENDO
MVC     OUTPUT(20),FIELDA   DO IF FIELDA = FIELDB
                ENDIF ,

In this example, the Assembler listing would look like:

                PRINT GEN                DISPLAY MACRO EXPANSIONS
                IF      (CLC,FIELDA,FIELDB,E),THENDO
+               CLC     FIELDA,FIELDB
+               BNE     $MDF0001
MVC     OUTPUT(20),FIELDA  DO IF FIELDA = FIELDB
                ENDIF ,
+$MDF0001       DC      0H'0'

