                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          JANUARY 2006

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982

Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@cbttape.org and/or
sbgolob@attglobal.net.


WORKING WITH WHAT YOU HAVE, AND ENJOYING IT

      Here's something I've been thinking about.  The "older people"
nowadays, in the years 200x, talk often about the 60's and 70's, and how
it was then.  Back in those days, in the 50's, 60's and 70's, the "older
people then" used to talk about the 20's all the time (and the Great
Depression in the 30's, and the First and Second Wars).  So we might
easily picture that the "older people" in the 20's used to talk about
the 1880's and 1890's.  And in the 1880's and 1890's there weren't even
any automobiles or trucks.  Everybody used horses.  Really!  There were
trains then, but no cars!  And somehow, everybody still managed to live
their lives "normally".

      So we have to be aware about how much everything has changed, and
how quickly it is still changing.  Even the younger people among us can
see this.  Ten or fifteen years ago, there were hardly any cell phones.
I visited Chicago once, at that time, and I was impressed about how you
couldn't find a phone booth there, as compared to New York.  Now, unless
your cell phone doesn't work (or you forgot it, perish the thought),
it's a moot point.  And the Internet is even newer!  Computers
themselves are getting faster every year, with mind-boggling jumps in
storage capacity and speed that we're easily getting used to, as they
occur.  And to tell you the truth, the Mainframe world (established as
it is), is no different.

      We are "techies".  We are supposed to be in the middle of all
this change.  We aren't just reacting to it.  We're CAUSING it too!  And
that's what I want to talk about today.  Our lives are a mixture of
both REACTING to all the changes, and PARTICIPATING in them also.  If
you think about it, it's a very exciting time to live in.  And by
considering these thoughts and bringing them more forward in our minds,
we can become more effective participants, as well as enjoying our work
better.

      Let's consider one more aspect of our jobs.  It's the fact that we
can APPRECIATE our job AT THE TIME WE ARE DOING IT.  This is a
privilege.  Not all jobs are like that.  There are many jobs which let
us ENJOY our surroundings, and there are some jobs which don't.  I'll
show you.

      I once read a "tale of woe" written by an expert "long snapper"
specialist in the National Football League.  His job, being performed in
a big stadium with 80000 people watching, required 100 percent
concentration with ABSOLUTELY no room for any other thoughts.  Every
move of his hands was thought out, to the millimeter!  As a consequence,
at the time he was doing his job, this man was not privileged to be able
to think about where he was.  At the very end of his (otherwise very
distinguished) career, he was hired to be the long snapper for a
contending team, for the final 3 games.  In the last game, he got
overwhelmed by the magnificence of the great crowd, enjoyed himself for
a second, muffed the snap, and cost his entire team, which had worked
hard all year, a trip to the playoffs.  It was all because he took some
time to enjoy his job, in a job that didn't allow it.  So we have to be
very grateful for our own positions, which do allow it.

      One of the ways that we can enjoy our own jobs, is to be able to
PARTICIPATE in the "change process" aspect of it.  Another way, is to
have fun using the new tools and gimmicks that other people have
developed.  Even though we might get caught up in the "drudgery" of
doing our daily tasks, we should wake ourselves up once in a while,
(using some kind of internal STIMER macro to remind us) and see how much
of this job we can really enjoy.


ENJOYING THE NEWS GROUPS

      IBM-Main is one of the nicest ways of keeping up with this field.
I'll admit that the IBM-Main newsgroup is highly dependent on the types
of questions which the people will write in, and therefore, the subject
matter will jump around a lot.  But since the IBM-Main group is
monitored by a lot of experts, from within IBM itself and outside IBM,
the replies there are often very authoritative, and you can learn a lot
by reading the IBM-Main digests.

      If you want to join IBM-Main, it is a listserv-based news group,
and you can subscribe at the listserv address of listserv@bama.ua.edu.
Once you've already subscribed, the posting address in
ibm-main@bama.ua.edu.  I once wrote an entire article in this column
about IBM-Main, which you can find on File 120 of the CBT Tape, as
member CL9804AP (April 1998).  You can also find that column in the
NaSPA archives, but I've since updated the subscription information in
the copy on CBT File 120, because it has changed since then.

      If I have time, I like to read through the IBM-Main digests and
see the kinds of MVS questions which people are concerned with.  It's
like reading a newspaper that has to do with MVS.  You can pick and
choose the threads you like, or you can simply sit down and read through
the whole thing.  If IBM-Main is too long for you, or it's not in your
exact special area, you can find many other news groups (based on
listserv or elsewhere, such as on yahoogroups.com).  To avoid cluttering
my email inbox, I get digests for all the groups I subscribe to.  One
hint about finding newsgroups:  If a group is listserv-based, you can
find all of them from any one of them.  And yahoogroups has a searchable
index, so you can find anything over there, that you might be interested
in.

      By the way, I've just started a news group of my own.  It is
called cbt-tape@yahoogroups.com.  Its purpose is to discuss the contents
of the CBT Tape collection, to report recent Updates to the collection,
and to report bugs and code changes to anything in the collection.  The
entire CBT Tape collection is free to anyone, and you don't have to be
a "member of anything" or know a password, to use it.  Just do a search
on www.google.com for "CBT Tape" and you should get there easily.


A PROGRESSION

      Over the years, I have found that my work as an MVS systems
programmer follows a pattern.  I get used to working with certain tools
and equipment.  Then I add to them, as I discover more.  Then the
technology improves, or I add to the technology by writing more tools
myself.  Then my techniques change and adapt, often to the extent that I
wonder how I ever was able to do my job before.  It's almost like
wondering how people were able to live when there were just horses, and
no cars.

      For example, since I use the PDS 8.6 command package from CBT Tape
File 182 (or its vendor equivalent Startool FDM from Serena) so often, I
wonder what life would be like without it.  If (just to choose one
situation for illustrative purposes) I might want to find all the
members of a partitioned dataset that were updated in the last two
weeks, I could do either of the following:  Without the PDS package, I'd
get an EDIT member list and do a "sort changed" command, or click on the
date field header.  With the PDS package, I'd get a partial member list
using the subcommand:  MEMLIST : LAST(14) , or use the abbreviation:
ML : BIWeek .  Because the PDS command offers many more options with its
member list than just doing an EDIT or BROWSE, I prefer the PDS way of
doing things.  But native ISPF has improved over the years too, and
without the PDS command package, it's not quite the same as going back
to a horse and wagon again.  The techniques using native ISPF are pretty
good, too.

      With non-IBM parts of our work, the situation has changed
dramatically too.  I don't know what I'd do without Windows cut and
paste on the terminal emulator screen.  If I'm logged onto two
completely different machines from the same pc, I can transfer screens
full of data using cut and paste.  Examples like this are innumerable.
Our life is far different than it was, even 10 years ago.


MORE SPECIFICS

      Lately, I've been using some neat gimmicks like the tools from Bob
Glover (of Jacksonville).  One tool, which requires a little bit of
setup (i.e. adding ADRDSSU to the IKJTSOxx AUTHPGM list) is an ADRDSSU
based dataset copy and move tool, that runs in the foreground.  The tool
is from CBT File 630 and it is called MC.  You enter TSO MC and get a
panel, asking which dataset(s) to move (in DFDSS control card format).
Then the panel sets up a DFDSS copy or move job which runs under your
TSO session, instead of in batch.  If your computer is fast enough (and
most of them are, nowadays) the jobs run pretty quickly, and you can
jockey your datasets around from pack to pack without much fuss.  It
makes my own DASD management, in a small shop, very clean and quick.
You might try and have a look at Bob's other files (numbers 608, 624,
626, 631 and 682) where he has contributed some other useful gimmicks.

      In the same vein, you should look at Mark Zelden's big toolbox on
CBT Tape File 434.  Especially nice is his IPLINFO REXX exec, that only
requires copying to SYSPROC or SYSEXEC to use.  The wealth of system
information that can be had, straight from a REXX, is mind boggling.
But Mark's stuff goes much farther than that, and once you're used to
using some of it, you'll never know how you ever did without it.

      I don't know what I'd ever do without MXI (the huge monitor) from
Rob Scott (CBT Files 409 and 410), or SHOWMVS and SHOWzOS (from Gilbert
Saint-flour and Roland Schiradin (File 492)).  These two monitors
display much MVS system information in an easy-to-use way.  The extent
of the information shown by both of these packages is very great, almost
unimaginable.  And they are free.

      I don't know how I'd ever be able to run through a control block
search without the LOOK TSO program from CBT File 264.  LOOK can format
many MVS control blocks, and chaining through them to see the incore
data, is a breeze.  I've written many an MVS utility with the info I've
gotten through a core browse using LOOK.  You can get LOOK to format any
control block at all, using the actual IBM macro itself, so you can
update the control block formatting with later versions of the macro,
any time you want.

      The TSO Fullscreen ZAP program (originally from UCLA) on File 134
of the CBT Tape (a load module is on File 135) is so handy for looking
at any DASD file, that I feel that if someone would have to do without
it, it would be like using a horse-cart instead of a truck.  It is true
that AMASPZAP can do many of the things that Fullscreen ZAP can, but
without any of the usability features.  You can even search through a
DASD pack to find deleted data, anywhere on it, using Fullscreen ZAP, in
authorized mode, with its FULLVOL keyword.


SUMMARY

      Progress is constantly being made, to improve our work
environment.  MVS tools are being written, and IBM is making many
"usability improvements" to the MVS operating system as well.  If you
would compare our work environment today, to the green screens of 20
years ago, and the speed of today's machines and their networkability,
to what wasn't there before, you might wonder how you ever were able to
do your work at all, in the old days.

      But we did our work then (a team of horses can pull pretty big
loads), and we do our work now too, only in a better manner.  Much of
the improvement, of course, depends on us--on our willingness to learn
about the new gimmicks as they arrive.  But besides our constant
striving to improve our methods, we must ever be grateful to live in
such a time, when the technology improvements keep pouring in.  This
gives us the food to nourish our thoughts.

      I hope that this month's column will serve to stimulate your
thought processes.  I hope that by mentioning a few of the tools now
available to make our lives easier, you will go out yourselves and
eventually find a few hundred of them.  Then you'll be able to tackle
bigger jobs (than a horse can do), in far less time.  All the best of
everything to all of you!  I hope to see you here again, next month.


