                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                           JUNE 2006

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982

Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@cbttape.org and/or
sbgolob@attglobal.net.


THE WORLD SHOULD BE FULL OF COLLECTORS

      I am a "fairly" firm believer in my not having to do the same job
twice, or at least too many times.  Of course, there are some advantages
to repeating the performance of a job.  It drives the procedures deeply
into your head.  You become familiar, in fact, quite intimately
familiar, with the processes.  They become part of your "skill set".
And for us, in our position, that is goodness, because as the system
doctors, we have to have a good handle on all of the everyday methods we
use, and we have to show that we are always confident in getting the
jobs done.

      But to have to repeat too many times, no!  We have to use
shortcuts too, otherwise, we'd never get our jobs done in a reasonable
amount of time.  In fact, one of the ways I feel I can tell a relative
newcomer from an "experienced hand" in this business, is to see how many
tools "for shortcuts" that he or she is familiar with using.  Over the
years, I was always happy with myself about how quickly I could get most
of the systems programming jobs finished.  Clever tools that people have
written, make this possible.  Saving your old JCL also makes this
possible.

      Problem is, that if you go from one shop to another, can you bring
your techniques with you?  If the techniques are dependent on the use of
commercial products, like "Omegamon" (from IBM) or "Resolve" (from BMC
Software), then what if the new shop doesn't have them?  Are you stuck?
Sometimes yes, sometimes no.  Of course, you don't have to start again
completely from square one, because you know the KIND of task you want
to accomplish.  You're familiar with the particular operation, such as
making a certain load library authorized.  But at the new place, you'll
have to find a substitute tool (if you can) that does the same thing.
Depending on the particular operation you're trying to do, this can be
hard, or even impossible, in the new environment.

      So the solution I've made for myself, is to collect a lot of free
tools that I can bring from one place to another, and I can install
them anywhere.  These are unencumbered by licensing, and they have been
tried and tested to get the job done, as well.  For pure portability, I
have come to like the REXX-based tools (such as those written by Mark
Zelden - CBT Tape File 434) a lot, because they are easy to install
(just copy them into a CLIST library) and there's less objection from
management about running them.  A REXX exec, even if it digs deeply
into system control blocks, conjures up the image (in a manager's mind)
that is similar to what a CLIST does.  It can't be objectionable,
because it's not a "product".  Nevertheless, the bread and butter of my
techniques is still based on collecting Assembler programs, and
Assembler-based tools.  However, the bottom line with me is always
that:  "Anything which works, is good, and anything which helps me now,
is even better."


SOMEBODY HAS HAD TO SAVE THE STUFF

      How do you go about acquiring these tools that you will use
throughout your working life?  Of course, you can do some of this for
yourself, in a very simple way.  You can save all the CLISTs, REXX
execs, edit macros, and JCL that you have ever written.  I always try to
do this for myself.  It helps me avoid having to spend time at a new
site, or even at the same site, repeating the work I've already
successfully done before.  Getting JCL correct, for some tools such as
ADRDSSU, is always a pain in the neck, if you have to start over from
the beginning.  It pays to save all the old job streams that have
already worked before.

      Using the OUTDSN keyword of the TSO XMIT command helps me to
convert pds'es into easy-to-transport FB-80 sequential files.  I find
these are also very helpful (at my current site) for backup purposes, in
case any of my files (God forbid) ever gets "wiped".  Entire tapes can
be saved on cd-roms or other PC-based files, using the VTT2DISK program
that I've written (see CBT Tape File 533).  VTT2DISK converts an entire
tape into an AWS-format tape image on DASD in FB-80 format, which can
then be downloaded in BINARY to a PC, and you can copy that PC file to a
cd-rom disk.  To reconstruct the real tape from the cd, or the PC file,
just upload it in BINARY from the PC to an FB-80 target file on the
mainframe, and run my VTT2TAPE program (also from CBT Tape File 533)
against that FB-80 file, to cut a real tape.  So tapes can be put on
cd-rom disks, and vice-versa.  You don't really need to have a tape
drive in order to save and access your tape data.

      That's all well and good for your own stuff.  How do you go about
getting access to other people's tools?

      Well, as you probably can figure out, the whole world is full of
people who save things and collect things.  Just look on Ebay for some
thing you'd like to have.  I once broke a "Jackie Gleason Honeymooners"
mug that my wife had been saving.  A short time afterward, I was able to
get on Ebay, and buy nine of them.  It made my wife a lot happier.
People save a lot of miscellaneous stuff, including MVS tools and parts
of old MVS operating systems.  You just need to know how to "network"
in order to have access to those resources.

      One place you can go, to get a huge head start, is the CBT Tape
web site.  Just do a Google search (www.google.com) for "CBT Tape" and
the CBT Tape web site should come up at, or near, the top.  You can
download anything that's available from there, and you don't have to be
a "member of anything" or even enter a password.  Just go there and get
all the tools you want or need.

      The user group lists, such as IBM-Main, or the other Listserv
based groups, and the yahoogroups based groups, etc., can provide a lot
of connectivity with other people who will be able to help you.  See my
April 1998 column in "Technical Support" (member CL9804AP in CBT File
120, or on the Naspa archives) which talks about how to join the
IBM-Main group, and other Listserv based groups.  Go to
www.yahoogroups.com to find and join the Yahoo groups of your choice.
I usually get "digest" files from all of the groups, which are all the
posts that were accumulated during one day, or (in the case of the
yahoogroups groups) collections of 25 messages or less, within each
day's postings.  This way, I can archive the digests without having to
read all the messages right now, and I can search them later if I need
some information, or to search for a person's current email address.

      I write to people who have posted to these groups, to ask them for
help with problems, or to discuss any MVS issues that I have.  You can
either write to the entire group, or if it is a more personal or
sensitive issue, you can write to one of the people personally.


OPTIONAL MATERIALS

      A licensed user of any flavor of MVS (z/OS, OS/390, MVS/ESA,
MVS/XA and so on backward) can order tapes of what is termed "Optional
Materials."  Optional Materials may be translated as "source code" and
"IBM Private macros."  These are available (for non-OCO modules and)
for many of the IBM program products, as well as for the base operating
system.

      It used to be, at the MVS/XA level and before, that IBM would give
away the source code of most of its MVS modules, to any licensed user
who requested them.  PTF levels of the modules were (then) available on
microfiche.  After ESA and the OCO restrictions on many of the newer
modules, source code and logic manuals were no longer made available for
them.  At the time of the introduction of MVS/ESA, around 1989, IBM
itself recommended that anyone who had logic manuals (and source code
tapes for that matter) had better save them.  Some people have saved
these materials even until now.

      Since these materials are the "licensed materials" and property of
IBM, they can't be distributed on public software collections such as
the CBT Tape collection.  But if you are currently working at a licensed
MVS site, I'd strongly recommend that you order all the optional
materials that your site is entitled to.  There is no extra cost
involved, as far as I have ever heard.  You just have to speak to your
IBM representative and request that the Optional Materials be made part
of your order configuration.  It's a win-win situation, even if you
don't think "right now" that you're a good Assembler programmer.  The
truth is that you're looking to the future, and you don't want to close
off any possible future opportunities.  Trust me on this.  I know, from
experience (both good and bitter)!

      You may worry about how to take care of the Optional Materials
tapes, when they come.  Of course, you can leave them in the closet, as
most people used to do.  But I have a better idea, so that the materials
will be more quickly accessible when you need them.

      Optional Materials tapes are almost always written in IEBUPDTE
SYSIN format.  This means that each member of a dumped pds is
"sequentialized" into one physical sequential (FB-80) file, and a
separator card of the format ./ ADD NAME=memname (starting in column 1)
is put before each member.  The TAPEMAP program (CBT Tape File 299) can
read a file on a tape, which is in this format, and report all of the
member names of pds members in that tape file.  So it comes out as a
result, that you can TAPEMAP the Optional Materials tapes, and the
TAPEMAP program will report all of the member names (read source modules
and macro names) contained therein.  This TAPEMAP report is a good thing
to have, and if you make an FB-133 partitioned dataset out of all the
TAPEMAP reports of all of your Optional Materials tapes, you can easily
search for member names, and find out which tapes contain a given source
module or "private" macro, and on which file number.  Then you should
keep some IEBUPDTE JCL handy, in order to dump any file from any given
tape, into an appropriately named pds on DASD.  In that way, you'll be
able to quickly locate and access any source module that you may need,
or want to look at.

      I personally would go one step further.  I would convert all the
tapes into cd-rom disks, duplicate and archive them.  That'll keep these
materials safer.  And it is much more compact to have a couple of cd-rom
disks, than a big stack of tapes.  They are also easier to duplicate and
archive.  If you already have a big pile of tapes, why create a second
pile just for safety?  Usually there is no room in the tape closet.  And
if you make the cd-roms, you still have the tapes themselves, for
backup.

      I use the VTT2DISK program (as described above) to convert the
entire tapes to disk files, and I FTP them or otherwise download them,
in BINARY, to a PC.  Then I can either copy them to a cd-rom as is, or
zip them first, to save space.  An awful lot of tapes can be fit onto
one cd-rom disk in this way.  Another alternative is to create the pds
files, one by one on MVS, using a big batch job to automate the process,
run the TSO XMIT command under TSO-in-Batch, to sequentialize the
pds'es, and then download (in BINARY) the individual XMIT-format files
to the PC and write them to cd-rom.  All of these methods work fine.  If
you want to view an XMIT-format MVS file directly on the PC, you can use
the marvelous "XMIT Manager" program which is downloadable from the CBT
Tape web site, and you can see, or print, all the pds members,
translated to ASCII.


SUMMARY

      I am of the opinion that MVS systems programmers should be
packrats.  In other words, we should intelligently (and neatly) save as
many MVS materials, good JCL, and other stuff, as we can.  It pays to
put in some extra time, to make these materials quickly accessible, and
to allow any given item to be easy to find.  I firmly believe and know
(from many years of experience) that reusing and re-customizing old
jobstreams can save tons of time and work.

      Next month, I hope to continue on this topic, concentrating more
on searching techniques, to make it more effortless to find all the old
stuff that you've already saved.  Have a good month, and I hope to see
you here again next time.

