                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                          APRIL 2006

(Written jointly with Courtney Taylor.)

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982

Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also participates in
library tours and book signings with his wife, author Courtney Taylor.
Sam can be contacted at sbgolob@cbttape.org and/or
sbgolob@attglobal.net.


INTERNATIONALIZATION

      Today we'd like to address an aspect of MVS development and
history that we seldom thought about in previous years.  This world is
becoming "one world", more and more.  The Internet is bringing people of
all countries together, like never before.  The Internet transcends and
penetrates national boundaries.  People in five or ten different
countries can all conference with each other at the same time, as well
as people in far flung corners of the same country, like the United
States or Canada.  Miles and kilometers don't mean anything, when it
comes to Internet messaging and traffic.  Messages can bounce halfway
(or all the way) around the world and back again, sometimes in less time
than it takes to blink an eye, only limited by the speed of light.

      The implications for MVS are about as great as they are for
anything else.  Recently, we've received software products from MVS
vendors, without tapes.  I just downloaded the entire product from an
FTP site, and uploaded it and installed it on the MVS mainframe in a
few minutes.  Tapes?  What tapes?  No tapes were ever involved.  And
it didn't even seem to make a difference what country the product was
coming from.  We've gotten products from Australia the same way as from
the U.S.

      As the proprietor of the "CBT Tape" collection of free MVS
software, this internationalization through the Internet has affected me
(and you) even more.  In years past, when I had to make an update to
some products in the collection, I had to carry a satchel full of tapes
into the computer room, mount them on tape drives, figure out what was
on them (one tape at a time), copy the stuff off onto DASD, and package
each creation coherently to make sure all the stuff was installable by a
reasonably trained MVS sysprog.  Most of the time, the tapes came from
the U.S.  Canada has some sort of strict regulation about exporting
computer tapes to the U.S., but we got a few from there too.  And from
other countries, the difficulty of sending a tape was often so
prohibitive (if not to say expensive also), that we got very few
contributions from the far-flung countries of the world.  Today, it
doesn't matter where the contributor is from.  The messages fly "fast
and furious", and sometimes a dozen messages will get sent back and
forth more than halfway around the world (each time) in the space of an
hour, to fix a contributed product.  My, has the world changed!  All we
have to worry about is time zones.

      Eighty years ago, some utopians, liberals (I don't know how to
name them accurately) wanted to start a movement to make "one world".
I remember hearing about this from my grandfather.  Of course, in the
proposed "one world", there would be a small obstacle known as a
language barrier.  The peoples of the world happen to speak hundreds of
different languages (in their everyday conversation and
communications).  How would you propose to solve that small problem
(eighty years ago)?  One inventive soul then, proposed to create a
"universal language" which he called "Esperanto", and he thought he
could get all the people to forget the languages they were born with,
throw them all into the garbage pail, and only speak Esperanto.  I
think you can figure out what happened to that plan!  But in the 1920s,
everybody was talking about it, and a few were even speaking Esperanto
(to their friends only).  I'll tell you, more people were speaking "Pig
Latin".

      But today, to our big surprise, this "one world" actually exists!
It has sneaked up on us.  And the Internet has made it happen.  What
about the language barriers?  People haven't forgotten all their
languages.  But they've all learned English in addition, and English
seems to be the de facto "Esperanto" that the fellow 80 years ago was
looking for.  Sometimes even the most Utopian dreams can actually come
true.  Go know!  They just have to wait for the right time.


IBM IS ALL OVER THE WORLD

      Everybody knows that IBM, and the MVS operating system, is all
over the world, in many countries.  There is a lot of "National Language
Support" (known as NLS) in IBM's products, MVS included.  Just go to
IBM's web site, www.ibm.com, and you'll see the long list of countries.
You might think that "it's all well and good, but how does that relate
to me?"  Well, with the Internet being what it is, and with newsgroups
on the Internet reaching out to MVS sysprogs all over the world, as soon
as we get onto one or more of the newsgroups and have a discussion, we
find ourselves talking to people from Europe, Asia, Australia, Africa,
of course North and South America, and just about any place except
Antarctica.  (I don't think IBM has established a North Pole office on
the ice yet.  But the technology is better now.  And I don't think
they'd need a raised floor for a datacenter there.)

      Being in charge of the CBT Tape contributions, I feel the effects
of internationalizaton a lot more.  Just a few days ago, a fellow in the
middle of Siberia wrote me with a modification of a fantastic program
called IEBLIST (a quick dataset lister for DASD packs, but much more
versatile than your usual VTOC lister programs).  IEBLIST was written by
a Brazilian fellow, (then) working for IBM Portugal, whose name is
Ricardo J.  Paranhos.  Since Ricardo (who speaks and writes Portuguese)
was an IBM'er and an excellent Assembler coder, his program was
supremely useful to everyone (see CBT Tape File 510, member name
IEBLIST).  But the allowed dataset selection criteria needed some more
tweaking.  The Russian fellow, Alexander I. Vasilenko, (who works for
the Krasnoyarsk Railway System) put some extra code into IEBLIST to
allow selection of datasets by either "creation date" and/or block size.
Then Alexander sent his code to me.

      Well for me, this was a scenario entitled "IEBLIST revisited."
The first time I had seen IEBLIST five years ago, the place where I
then worked, needed the program very much.  So I didn't want to leave
the Portuguese comments just as they were.  Somebody who didn't know
Portuguese might have to read them later.  So I wrote to Ricardo
offering to try and translate them into English.  I bought a Portuguese
dictionary, found that Portuguese is a lot different from Spanish, and
got about a third of the way through the program, before time
constraints (and my boss) forced me to stop.  Ricardo checked my
translations and found them OK.  Then he went a bit further and
translated a few more of the comments himself.  But about half the
program's comments still remained in Portuguese.  When Alexander sent me
his modified version, I decided to translate the rest of the comments
into English.  As of this writing, we can't locate Ricardo, but both
Alexander and I appreciate his work very much, and we both want to
publicly thank him.

      This is what the MVS world has now become, in microcosm.  While I
had Alexander's attention, I asked him to send me the code pages for
EBCDIC Russian Language support.  The issue was relevant to IEBLIST
itself, because I wanted to know if I should uppercase the dataset names
that were being reported.  But I worried that the technique for
uppercasing characters in Russian might be different from that in
English.  (In English you don't need a translate table.  Since uppercase
letters in EBCDIC in English are represented the same as lowercase,
except for the X'40' bit, you can uppercase any letter in English by
"or-ing it" against a blank, which is X'40' in EBCDIC.)

      I had had another issue with MVS in the Russian language.  When
Valentin Chernyak first released the source code to his marvelous REASM
interactive disassembler program which runs under ISPF, I had seen some
Russian language pds member names, and I was confused by them.
Valentin's REASM source code is on CBT Tape File 243, (the rest of his
product is on Files 238 thru 242) and the Russian pds member names have
since been cleaned up.  But I wanted to know, from Alexander, whether
IBM permits Russian-language pds names, dataset names, or volume names
in the MVS operating system, when NLS support for Russian is enabled.

      Alexander answered all my questions and he sent me a copy of the
EBCDIC Russian language code pages.  I found out that the "or-ing" trick
with blanks doesn't work in Russian.  Since the EBCDIC representation of
Russian lowercase letters does not fit nicely with the EBCDIC
representation of the corresponding uppercase letters, you have to use a
customized translate table to "uppercase" the characters in Russian.
Obviously, for other languages that have uppercase and lowercase
letters, you'd need a different customized translate table for that
purpose.  So you can't use one technique to cover uppercasing for
multiple languages.  I also found out that pds member names can
certainly be in Russian letters.  (Remember SMP4, where many of the pds
member names were hex values?)  But dataset names have to be in English
characters, and the jury is out on volser names.  Alexander tells me
that where he works, they haven't tried to use Russian volser names.

      So from this experience, I have already seen an eyeful.  I have no
experience at all with the "double byte character set" languages like
Chinese, Japanese, or Korean.  But even with a "single byte character
set" that has different characters, like Russian, I've encountered
plenty of MVS issues.  And I've come to the conclusion that
internationalization is certainly a relevant consideration in today's
MVS world.


OTHER USEFUL PROGRAMS FROM THE WORLD OVER

      Now that we've gotten your curiosity going about CBT Tape
contributions from all over the world, it is only fair to you that we
mention a few of them to you.  To get hold of the CBT Tape files over
the Internet, just do a www.google.com search for "CBT Tape", and our
CBT Tape web site should come out at, or near, the top.  Everything
there is free to download, and you don't need a password.

      CBT Tape Files 535, 536, and 670 come from my friend Deru Sudibyo
in Indonesia.  Deru used to work for IBM Indonesia and is (like Ricardo)
a very good coder.  File 535 contains a TSO command to do dynamic
dataset allocation and deallocation, and it is quite a bit more general
than most commands of this type.  File 536 contains XDI, a combined
CA-Xcom and CA-DIspatch solution for Report Distribution Management.
File 670 contains a mathematical functions package for REXX, similar to
the math function package for PL/I.  You can see that Deru has done some
very useful work.

      I have to say something about the very large Australian
contingent.  My first introduction to them was through Greg Price, who
is a very skilled Assembler programmer, and who has produced enormous
enhancements to the REVIEW program (CBT Files 134 and 135), including an
ISPF-like editor that works under both RAW TSO and ISPF.  Greg has also
added a lot of PDSE support to the PDS program package (CBT File 182),
together with John Kalinich.  (Here you see some more international
cooperation.  John Kalinich is in Saint Louis, Missouri.  Greg is in
Melbourne.  No problem.)

      Andrew Armstrong's varied and highly innovative contributions
(Files 628, 629, 640, 647, 706, and 725) have already been mentioned a
bit here, and his work deserves much more "press" than we have space for
this month.  Paul Gillis (File 382) has a nice collection of programs,
Murray Nicholas (CBT File 345) has provided a generalized MPF exit which
is the basis for Glenn Siegel's enormously enhanced "generalized MPF
exit package" that is on File 708.  Now that Glenn's package is out, I'd
recommend installing it over Murray's package, but Murray's package is
the one that started things off.  I'd also like to refer you to Gerard
Nicol's REXX function package (CBT Files 323 and 324).

      Solomon Santos (CBT File 555) is a Filipino from Manila who lives
in Sydney, Australia, and who has been a longtime contributor to the MVS
community in various ways.  David Marsden (Files 374, 375, 376) has sent
in some very innovative things, especially on File 376.  I also want to
thank Shane Ginnane for his good work, as well.

      Contributors from Spain have been there too.  Salvador Carrasco
(File 386) had been employed as a computer operator, and taught himself
MVS systems programming without any help or job tasks in the field.  As
a result of his enormous efforts to learn the field on his own (which is
almost unheard of), Salvador's contributions and utilities are unique
and highly original.  I think he eventually got a systems programming
job.  (At least I hope so.)  Other contributors from Spain are:
Baldomero Castilla (File 480 and 481), Jose Maria Martinez and Angel
Luis Dominguez (File 513), and Chema Alvarez (File 687).

      It's time to close, but I can't forget to mention Paul Moinil's
original contributions and modifications to other CBT files (Files 453
thru 459) which, although they are getting a bit old, are still relevant
today.  Paul has retired from computing altogether; he is from Belgium
and he lives in Italy.  Paul's friend Antonio Colombo (formerly of
Amdahl Italy) has sent Paul's work to me over the years, and I still
correspond with them through Antonio.  Antonio used to actually mail
"real tapes" to me, in years gone by.

      So I hope you've gotten a small glimpse of "MVS International", so
to speak.  MVS sysprogs and programmers everywhere are a very clever and
innovative bunch.  So when you have access to the work of more of them,
you'll always benefit from it.  I wish all of you the best of everything,
and I'm looking forward to seeing you here again next month.

