                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                            MAY 2008

By Sam Golob and Courtney Taylor
-- --- ----- --- -------- ------

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982

Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also
participates in library tours and book signings with his
wife, author Courtney Taylor. Sam can be contacted at
sbgolob@cbttape.org and/or sbgolob@attglobal.net.


PRESERVING YOUR TAPES FOR POSTERITY

      Over the nearly 30 years that I've been in this field, most people
who've worked with us and talked with us have taken "progress" for
granted.  Everything has been improved.  The hardware is always getting
better and faster.  The disk drives are getting better, bigger, and
faster.  The old clunker green-screen terminals have been taken over by
multi-color emulators running on the PC.  And, of course, software
developments abound, both in the operating system software, and in the
application software.  Recently, the software that is avalable for the
PC's themselves, has taken several quantum leaps forward, so it seems.
And the new capabilities of the hand-held computers and mobile phones
blow the mind away.  Modern times sure are exciting!

      How does all this reflect on the world of tapes?  Let's think
about it.  Tapes were always the "overflow medium" and the "archive
medium" for MVS systems.  In the early days, tapes had bigger capacities
for holding data than did disk packs.  So when you wanted to back up or
preserve the data on disk packs, you'd back them up to tape.  Now, with
"redundant copying" of data on disks, with bigger and faster disks, with
"virtual tapes" that are really disk files, and with far faster data
transmission speeds to duplicate current data at remote locations, it's
developing that people are really moving away from the concept of using
tapes for archiving data.  MVS (read z/OS) installations are having a
tendency to keep fewer and fewer tape drives.  In the current
atmosphere, we've even heard of some installations who are considering
getting rid of all, or most of their tape drives altogether.

      This doesn't mean that tapes are getting useless.  First of all, a
tape backup will preserve a "snapshot" (so to speak) of the contents of
a disk AT ONE PARTICULAR TIME.  Having a record like that can be very
important.  It's nice to know that there is a stable recording or a
stable "level" of the "ever changing" disk pack archived somewhere, that
you can refer to.

      But now we'll delve into another aspect of tapes and their
"technology", which is far more consequential and relevant to us.  I'd
say that this following observation is the main point of our article.


THE IMPACT OF THE P/390 AND HERCULES ON "TAPES"

      There's this point to make.  Ten years ago, who would've thought
that my PC at home would be able to emulate hardware, and even run an
old copy of the MVS operating system?  Well today, it's a reality.  Not
only does the commercial FLEX-ES (TM of Fundamental Software) system
(most of the "development ones" are currently expiring as we write)
emulate IBM hardware on a PC, but even the open-source Hercules system
can do it too.  Legally, you can download and operate an old 1975-level
MVS on Hercules at home, for free.  And since there are a good many
retirees and other interested parties constantly improving that old MVS
(it supports 3380s and 3390s now, and there are ISPF-like file editors
for it), it's rapidly becoming a practical "new environment" for
seasoned MVS practitioners to work in.  All of their saved tapes from 20
and 25 years ago, are suddenly becoming "relevant" again.

      But our additional observation is, that this Hercules system, and
the improved old MVS system which legally runs with it, can read
virtual, AWS-format tapes as though they were real tapes.

      What does that mean to us?

      Well, when IBM developed their P/390 systems (in the 1990s) as a
hardware platform to run MVS on a PC, they had to make a "virtual tape"
format which simulated a tape, on a disk file.  Not everyone had real
tape drives that they could attach to a PC.  (One drive would cost about
12K dollars at that time.)  Since IBM's prefix to designate the P/390
software (IBM always has a prefix) was "AWS", their format of disk file
which imitates a tape, is called AWS-format by most people.  I think
that the FLEX folks came up with that term first, because they wanted to
differentiate IBM's P/390 tape format from their own Faketape (TM)
virtual tape format.

      Anyway, once there's AN ACCESSIBLE disk format to represent an
entire tape, people can start using it independently.  This contrasts
with the disk formats for Virtual Tape libraries, which are proprietary.
AWS tape format is not proprietary.  Anyone can make "tapes" in this
format, which is public knowledge.

      You don't need to have a P/390 machine either.  If you have tapes
in AWS format, there are several ways in which you can read them.
First, Hercules recognizes virtual tapes in AWS-format as being "tapes".
So if you have a running Hercules system, you can mount the AWS-format
tapes on that system using a "devinit" command, and you can run a
TAPEMAP job or other such job against the AWS-format tape file, as
though it were a real tape.

      Another way of directly looking at an AWS-format tape on the PC,
is by using David Trout's (www.softdevlabs.com) AWSBROWSE program on a
Windows machine.  I've packaged this program on CBT Tape File 782
(www.cbttape.org - please look on the Updates page) as a .zip file which
unzips to an .exe file that should be installed on Windows.  Because the
CBT Tape files are intended to be used on an MVS system, the
installation of this one, which is intended to be used on a Windows
machine, is a bit awkward.  Here's how it goes.

      File 782 should be uploaded to MVS in BINARY.  Do a TSO RECEIVE
with the INDS( ) parameter on MVS into a pds.  Then you download the
AWSBR152 member of the pds, in BINARY, back down to the PC.  After
unzipping that on the PC, you get an .exe file, which you can install on
Windows.  The AWSBROWSE program, once installed on the PC, will allow
you to view all the blocks, and label information, on the AWS-format
tape file.  Go to www.cbttape.org on the Updates page, and get AWSBROWSE
for yourself.  David Trout's website, www.softdevlabs.com, also has the
latest and greatest AWSBROWSE program (much easier to install).

      What can you do to handle AWS-format "tapes" on a "pure MVS"
system?  Plenty.  On CBT Tape File 533, there is a set of utilities to
make a "real tape" from an AWS-format tape, and vice-versa.  The one
point is that on MVS disk, the AWS-format tape must be folded over into
an FB (fixed block) disk dataset with record length (LRECL) equal to 80
(but with any block size that is a multiple of 80).  That can be
accomplished by FTP-ing the AWS file from the PC up to the mainframe, in
BINARY, into an FB-80 dataset.  The folding over will be accomplished
automatically by FTP.  Then the VTT2TAPE program from File 533 will read
the folded-over AWS format file, and cut a real tape from it.  The
VTT2DISK program will do the opposite, and will create a folded-over
FB-80 AWS-format tape file from a real tape, which can then be FTP-ed
down to a PC file.

      So it results that if you use the VTT2TAPE utility to convert an
AWS-format "tape" into a real tape, and the VTT2DISK utility to do the
opposite, the two media would become interchangeable.  And furthermore,
if you had a Hercules system running on your PC, at home or at work,
even if it is running the old free MVS from 1975 (but improved), you can
still map the AWS-format tapes directly, and look at their contents,
before trying to convert them to real tapes for z/OS use.  To obtain a
copy of VTT2TAPE and VTT2DISK and related programs, go to
www.cbttape.org, look first at the Updates page and then at the CBT
page, and download File 533 from there.

      Now, the consequence would be, that instead of having to save
tapes, you could save PC AWS-format disk files on cd-rom or DVD.  These
take up far less physical space than even a cartridge does, and anybody
with an inexpensive DVD or CD duplicator machine can make backup copies
of them.  (We just bought a 5-tier DVD duplicator for $449.  Works
fine.)  Therefore, even if you are worried that a cd-rom or DVD might
not last, when you have 2 or more duplicates of them, you're somewhat
safer.  And if you have a standalone DVD duplicating machine, you're
even better off!

      Just to show you an example of how good this technology is, we
have just made one DVD that contains probably 100 tapes on it, including
40 back-level CBT Tapes, all zipped.  These are the wonders of modern
technology.  In our opinion, that should change people's thinking.  At
least, you personally should save your own "favorite tapes" from your
collection, in this way, even if these methods still might be deemed
impractical at a corporate level.


KEEPING FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS IN MIND

      We have seen that if you have entire tapes in AWS-format, stored
away on CD, on DVD, or on PC disk, you can either read them with a
Hercules system, browse them on the PC using David Trout's AWSBROWSE
program, or convert them to real tapes on any MVS system, using the
VTT2TAPE program from CBT Tape File 533.  Even today, these alternatives
allow you to store your tapes away as PC disk files, and to use them
profitably when you'll need them.  But there is one missing piece.  That
is, you currently (at this time) can't treat an AWS-format "tape file"
with a native MVS (z/OS) system, as though it were a real tape.  My take
on this situation is as follows.  Future developments will open up new
possibilities.

      For example, if someone develops a subsystem that will allow MVS
to read AWS-format tape data as though it were a real tape, then using
just minor changes in JCL, you'll be able to directly run all MVS-based
tape programs against an AWS-format tape file, just as though it were a
real tape.  So then, you'll be able to directly TAPEMAP an AWS-format
tape file that's on MVS DASD, or you'll be able to copy it with the
COPYMODS program (CBT Tape File 229) or any other tape copying program,
to either a real tape, or to another AWS-format tape image.  This hasn't
been written yet, but as soon as it HAS been done, and it's in place and
debugged, a whole world of "tape manipulation" possibilites will then be
opened up.  So you can see why it pays (even now) to save your tapes as
PC files, in AWS format.  When this stuff gets developed (and it will),
you'll then have a whole world of things to do with your AWS-format
tapes!  We're simply saying that "vaporware" doesn't always stay
vaporware.  It gets developed, through the efforts of concerned people,
and then all of us can get the benefit.


CONCLUSION

      We're saying, yet again, that when technological developments
come, they require a rethinking of our methods.  New technology opens up
new possibility.  Having a 4.7 gig DVD, and the possibility of
representing entire tapes, from end to end, in the publicly available
AWS disk format, allows us to store the complete contents of many tapes
on one small disk.  Having inexpensive DVD disk duplicators available,
makes the preservation of all of this data much easier.  And with more
tools to "read" this data constantly being written, it pays to save our
tapes in this format, so we will be able to use their contents far into
the future.

      We wish all of you a good and happy month, and we're looking
forward to seeing you here again, next time.

