                MVS TOOLS AND TRICKS OF THE TRADE
                           MARCH 2008

                                      Sam Golob
                                      MVS Systems Programmer
                                      P.O. Box 906
                                      Tallman, New York 10982

Sam Golob is a Senior Systems Programmer.  He also
participates in library tours and book signings with his
wife, author Courtney Taylor. Sam can be contacted at
sbgolob@cbttape.org and/or sbgolob@attglobal.net.

CBT Tape Recent Developments - Part 2

      Every once in a while, we devote an installment or two of this
column to displaying some of the newer contributions to the CBT Tape MVS
Utilities collection, which have been either submitted recently, or have
been considerably enhanced lately.  The CBT Tape collection can be found
at www.cbttape.org, and you don't need to be a member of anything, or to
know a password, to get any of the thousands of software tools, large or
small, which are posted there.

      Last month, we talked about three of the biggest contributions (or
group of contributions in Lionel Dyck's case.) of software in the CBT
collection that are useful for MVS shops.  These were the PDS package
from File 182, the REVIEW package from File 134, and Lionel Dyck's big
collection of packages on Files 312, 313, and 314, which includes (but
definitely is not limited to) his XMITIP package that is a comprehensive
and very rich facility to send emails from an MVS system.

      Today, we'll continue by describing some of the other new and
improved software programs and packages in the CBT Tape collection.
Again, the list is long, and we're not going to come near to getting to
the end of it.  But I'm here to whet your appetite, and if you explore
the CBT Tape collection for yourself, I'd bet that you see quite a few
software items that you'd put on your own wish list.  Since these
programs and packages are already available and they're free, your
wishes will turn to reality very quickly, just for the downloading and
installing of them.

      Of course I have to add the caveat that since these programs are
free, no warranties come with them, but by and large they usually (at
least in many cases) have been thoroughly tested (by users like you and
me, and by the authors), though the degree of testing will have varied
from package to package.  Most of the time, you have access to source
code (or to the program authors), so fixes can be made or obtained
rather quickly in many cases, practically speaking.


PACKAGES, PACKAGES, PACKAGES

      We can start by talking about CBT File 708, which is an automation
package by Glenn Siegel called MPFXTALL.  MPFXTALL works as a
generalized MPF exit, and it can be rigged up to automate your startup
and shutdown procedures, for example.  But MPFXTALL can do anything that
any MPF exit can do.  As an MPF exit, MPFXTALL can get control very
early in the IPL process, so therefore you have very complete startup
and shutdown coverage.  Glenn himself includes MPFTXALL into the systems
he sets up, so this package has been tested quite thoroughly.

      Mark Zelden's large collection of tools is on CBT Tape File 434,
which he updates quite frequently.  Many of Mark's tools are written in
REXX, so they are quite easy to install.  One of the key members of this
collection is Mark's IPLINFO program, a REXX exec that displays (under
ISPF BROWSE or even under TSO READY mode) many statistics about your
latest IPL, the Link List, LPA list, APF library list, subsystem info,
address space statistics, startup parms, a virtual storage map, and
more.  This stuff was all obtained using REXX!

      Mark has a half-zillion other tools in his collection.  One useful
subset of them is ZBROWSE, ZEDIT, and ZVIEW.  When you're editing a file
which contains a dataset name, just put the cursor on the same line,
enter ZEDIT, ZVIEW, or ZBROWSE on the command line, and you'll EDIT,
VIEW, or BROWSE, that dataset!  For TSO commands which use the PUTLINE
display interface, you can capture their output and BROWSE, VIEW, or
EDIT it, using Mark's TSOB, TSOV, and TSOE commands.  Just say TSOB,
TSOV, or TSOE before issuing the TSO command whose output you want to
capture.  Mark also has a way to make a one-pack or a two-pack MVS
system out of your current (full size) MVS system, so you can
conveniently make a "rescue system" for yourself.  Just look at his
ONEPAKxx and TWOPAKxx members on File 434.  Mark's stuff is definitely
worth exploring, installing, and (in some cases) customizing for
yourself.

      Gilbert Saint-flour is the original author of the fantastic
SHOWMVS program, which now is on File 492 and is maintained by Roland
Schiradin.  The latest (64-bit) versions of SHOWMVS are now called
SHOWzOS.  SHOWzOS displays a huge number of internal MVS quantities from
both the entire running MVS system, and from the invoker's TSO session.
Information from a huge number of internal MVS control blocks, both
documented and undocumented (by IBM) are displayed.  This is a program
(a TSO command) that you ABSOLUTELY HAVE TO try for yourself.

      Gilbert's OTHER stuff is on CBT Tape File 183.  There, Gilbert has
written, or supplied us with, so many original tools that it boggles the
mind.  I'll mention just a few of them, and what they do.  One handy
tool is a TSO LOGON reconnect exit, IKJEFLN2, which allows your TSO
session to switch from one tube to another, through the execution of the
VTAM command:  VARY NET,TERM,TYPE=COND,NOTIFY=NO,SLU=tubelu  where
tubelu is the LU (logical unit) of the new terminal.  Gilbert sells an
improved version of this IKJEFLN2 exit with a graphical interface, but
his free version is quite fine.

      Now we'll mention a few of Gilbert's more novel programs, the like
of which are hard to find elsewhere.  I have to tell you that I'm not
going to come close to mentioning all of them.  You have to look at CBT
File 183 for yourself.

      A REXX exec called VSAVE operates as an edit macro, but in a VIEW
session, to SAVE the member being VIEWed, just as a SAVE command will
save a member being edited.  Ever have trouble deleting an uncataloged
dataset because another dataset with the same name was OPEN?  Well,
Gilbert's BYPASSNQ batch program will solve that.  Another program is
called DONTFAIL.  If a batch job has multiple inputs, and one of them
isn't cataloged or isn't there, DONTFAIL will allow the job to "not
fail" by DUMMYing out the DD name that isn't there.  Gilbert's BR TSO
program allows you (if ISPF is present) to browse most VSAM and BDAM (as
well as normal non-VSAM) data sets.  BR may be invoked as a TSO command,
as a program, or as an EDIT macro.  LINKLLA is a batch program to
simulate a "REFRESH LLA" command in a batch job.  Three scenarios are
possible.  You can refresh a whole library, or a single member, or you
can linkedit a load module into an LLA managed library and refresh it in
a single step.

      A subset of Gilbert's utilities which he has reworked to operate
at the (very old) MVS 3.8 level under Hercules, can be found on CBT File
749.  And I haven't even begun to scratch the surface in listing many of
Gilbert's innovative programs.  We must go on.


NEW CONTRIBUTIONS

      We have been blessed with contributors.  Now, I'll mention a few
of the latest contributions to the CBT Tape collection, among many
others of them.

      Steve Bacher has donated much of his life work, in several
programming languages:  Assembler, C, and PL/I, to the CBT Tape
collection, in File 772.  Arthur Fichtl has contributed an interactive
disassembler that can disassemble a chunk of storage in a dump.
Arthur's contribution is in CBT File 773.  Craig Schneiderwent has coded
a proof of concept application which allows CICS COBOL to respond to
HTTP requests.  Craig's program is in CBT File 775.  Robert Prins, of
RPF fame (an ISPF-like editor found in Files 415 (non-XA) and 417 (XA))
has contributed a very novel set of REXX execs that are run as ISPF edit
macros.  These macros turn code, from various programming languages,
into HTML source.  Optionally, these REXXes will invoke a browser to
display the resulting HTML code.  Rob's HTML stuff is found in CBT File
769.

      Let's mention just a few more of the newest things.  Daniel Gaeta
has contributed (CBT File 767) a frontend for TRSMAIN to TERSE and
UNTERSE files in TRSMAIN compress format.  Daniel Gaeta has also
contributed (CBT File 778) a set of programs to access the SMP/E API,
GIMAPI, through REXX variables, to produce reports from SMP/E zones.
Steve McColley, who is the current maintainer of what used to be called
the "JES2 Mellon Mods", has contributed extensions to the original mods
and has included additional exits, at the z/OS 1.7 and 1.8 levels, in
CBT File 766.  As far as I know, the original "Mellon Mods" JES2
functions are still there too.

      Ken Fitzgerald has contributed an entire package called LOGGRASM
(CBT File 757).  According to his description: LOGGRASM is a utility to
perform basic source setup of an Assembler program, and to log basic
information about an Assembler program during execution. This utility
provides a method to show program execution in Assembler language
programs.  LOGGRASM is a tool to assist students and new programmers in
learning Assembler on a mainframe.  Ken has already taken LOGGRASM
through five revisions, since having first submitted it to the CBT
collection.

      Rick Bourgeois (CBT File 768) has converted my File 533 programs
(named VTT2****) to run under VM and CMS.  These programs will take a
"real tape" and convert it into either an AWS-format disk file, or a
FLEX-ES FAKETAPE format disk file, and vice-versa.  From one of those
disk files, you can actually cut a real tape.  These programs make it
possible to archive your large collections of tapes into a few DVDs or
CD-rom disks.  They also makes it possible for expired or expiring
FLEX-ES users to convert their FAKETAPE format tapes, so they will run
under other MVS systems.

      Let's mention just a few more new things, before ending.
Karl-Heinz Doppelfeld (CBT File 771) has contributed an ICSF (Integrated
Cryptographic Service Facility) monitor written in REXX, which displays
various ICSF statistics.  Edgar Hofmann (CBT File 776) has contributed a
revised version of RECV390 to expand an XMIT-format MVS file on a PC.
Philippe Cochy has contributed CBT File 777 which contains a REXX exec
to read a dcollect report and check disk space occupancy.  This REXX
contains an original algorithm to filter dataset names.  Roland
Schiradin has upgraded his COBANAL program (CBT File 321) so it will
interpret load modules from the latest versions of COBOL.  Tom Conley
(CBT File 495) has upgraded his "Dynamic ISPF" package (which helps you
allocate files for individual ISPF applications, as needed) to a new
release level.  Bill Godfrey (CBT file 741) has contributed his MAKEB64
program that encodes/decodes a text file to/from BASE64 format.  Bill
Bass (CBT File 779) has contributed a very clever COBOL program which
looks at a job in SDSF and performs symbolic substitutions based on the
symbolic substitutions made by the Converter and the Interpreter.


THINGS ARE EXCITING

      So I'm very happy to report that the CBT Tape collection is a
dynamic and ever-changing environment.  Go to www.cbttape.org, look
at the Updates page, and see for yourself.

      All the best of everything to all of you.  I'm looking forward
to seeing all of you here again, next month.

