This dataset has the source and jcl for the SYSTEMID command.  It
comes, originally, from the CBT tape (file 300), but has been heavily
modified and extended by Art Tansky at SunGard.

DISCLAIMER:

       This code has worked at Sungard.  There is no guarantee that the
       code will work anywhere else.  Neither Sungard nor the author
       may be held reponsible for any damage caused by this code.


To assemble and link the source, use the ASMJCL member, making
necessary dataset name changes.

The SYSTEMID command will be linked non-authorized.  To get full
information when running under VM, you must use the SYSTEMAU command,
which is linked authorized.  The command name must also be specified as
a valid TSO authorized command.  There is nothing sacred about these
names, you can rename them to whatever you wish.

Unlike the original code, this will only work for XA systems and above.
In order to allow maximum information from non-authorized code, a STIDP
instruction is not used.   Instead the serial number, etc. is gotten
from the CVT prefix area; that was not filled in prior to XA.

Notice that the CPU model type is generated from a table based on the
first byte of the serial number.  If your model is not in the table,
you can add it, but make sure the table is kept in proper collating
sequence; X'A' will SORT before X'1' but must come after it in the
table.  The values can be found in the Functional Characteristics
manual for the processor type.

I'm sorry about the relative sparseness of comments, but the original
code did not have a lot, and neither did the program I stole the VM
stuff out of.

The members included are:
     $$DOC       This member
     ASMJCL      Assemble and link JCL
     HELPMEM     Help member for SYSTEMID
     LDROP       macro
     LUSE        macro
     PRIME       macro
     REGS        macro
     SYSTEMID    Source for the SYSTEMID command
     SYSTEMOL    Source for previous version of the SYSTEMID command
     TABLE       macro
     TERME       macro
