
                          JOHN HOOPER UTILITIES

  email:  jvh@carolina.rr.com

  This member reflects the changes that have been made to the materials
  in this member.

  Changes dated 09/01/03

  Entries removed:

     JES$LF    This exit 5 routine was affected by the changes that were
               part of z/OS 1.2.  After much discussion at our
               installation is was determined that the effort and time to
               update this exit was not worth its limited use.  We, like
               most installation use IOF or SDSF to access the jobs in
               the print queue.  The operator's console is only used by
               the "old timers".  We may add this back in the future as
               time allows but it is unlikely that time will ever allow.
               Sorry.

  Entries added:

     PAGEFIX   This utility allows an installation to effectively
               dynamically remove storage from the system.  This
               can be either to reserve it for some future use or
               to determine the effects that a major new application
               may have on paging.

     CONSOLE   This TSO command provide a similar look and feel as an
               operators console.  Several levels of security can be set
               to grant varying lists of commands to be issued.  It is
               typically linked into the system as CONS so as not to be
               confused with the IBM supplied CONSOLE command.

     LISTF     This TSO command provides ANOTHER way to list the free
               space for one or more disk volumes.  The one feature that
               I think sets is apart from the others is the support for
               SMS STORAGE GROUP and status without having to use ISMF.
               It uses an undocumented interface and, as such, is subject
               to future failures.  It also provides flexible selection
               criteria and sort criteria.

  Entries updated:

     COMMAND   This utility was greatly extended.  New commands like
               IFSTARTED, IFSTOPPED, IFONLINE, IFOFFLINE, ONLINE,
               OFFLINE were added as well as support for 4 digit
               reply numbers.  See member $COMMAND for details.

     FLSMFCAT  Improved Y2K support was added.

               Updated date processing to allow selection using
               several date formats including Gregorian.

               Updated date processing to allow display in either
               Julian or Gregorian format.  It new defaults to
               displaying the date in Gregorian format.

               Time processing was improved to allow printing across
               midnight.

     FLSMFJOB  Improved Y2K support was added.

               Time processing was improved to allow printing across
               midnight.

     FLSMFDSN  Improved Y2K support was added.

               Added support for number of extents.

               Added support for VSAM statistics.

               Time processing was improved to allow printing across
               midnight.

     MODLOOK   Support for dynamic linklists was added.

  Changes dated 04/19/06

  Entries updated:

     COMMAND   This utility was extended to add the UNALLOC command.
               This "command" allows the program to wait for a
               specified disk address to be released by all users
               before continuing.  This was added for the benefit
               of the FlashCopy (tm) facility that requires that
               the target of a volume copy action not be in use.

     FLSMFJOB  Added a new date processing control statement

               The IRANGE statement was added to filter the input based
               upon a starting date and time and ending date and time.
               What is different is that IRANGE processing will alter
               the record to only statistically include the portion of
               the record that is within the IRANGE.

               For instance, if an SMF record reflects a job, step,
               or interval that is partially included in the IRANGE,
               the record will be altered.  The starting and ending
               dates and times will be changed to fit fully within
               the IRANGE values and all counts will be adjusted to
               reflect the percent of the record that falls within
               the IRANGE.

               Note that this effectively creates an interval record
               but is not treated as such.  It will alter job, step,
               or interval records without distinction.

               This allows a user to determine resources that are used
               by all address spaces in a specific interval.  Using
               the INTERVAL control statement would include interval
               records from long running tasks or jobs to create a
               relative complete report of all activity during the
               specified interval.

     LISTF     Increased the number of disk volumes that will be
               processed.

  Changes dated 04/29/08

  Entries updated:

     COMMAND   This utility was updated to be compatible with z/OS
               release 1.8.  It still should work with most releases
               of OS/390 and z/OS.

     CONSOLE   This utility was updated to be compatible with z/OS
               release 1.8.  It still should work with most releases
               of OS/390 and z/OS.

     LISTF     This TSO command was updated to allow the STORAGEGROUP
               specification to be optionally generic instead of
               assuming that it was generic.

     FLSMFJOB  Added support for the different types of serviceunits
               and add subtotal support.

               Prior to this change the service units that were listed
               were TOTAL service units.  Most interest is with the
               CPU service units.  Each type, CPU, I/O, MSO, and SRB
               service units can now be shown separately.

               The SUBTOTAL statement was added to allow the numeric
               fields in the report to be accumulated according to
               the field names in this statement.  Note that the SORT
               statement should also be used with compatible field
               names to generate a report in proper sequence and with
               proper subtotalling.

  Changes dated 05/25/10

  Entries updated:

     FLSMFJOB  Added a new NOJOB option to exclude batch jobs from
               reporting.  This makes is consistent with the NOTSO and
               NOSTC options.

               Added support for JES2 job numbers up to 999,999.  This
               change was originally supplied by Marty French from ST.
               Lukes Regional Medical Center in Boise Idaho.


               Added support for a change initiated by Peter Hunkeler
               that added a new keyword "CPUTIMEFRACTS".  This keyword
               requests that hundredths of a second are taken into
               account when selecting records by CPU time and when
               printing CPU time values.


               Clarified an issue with JOBLEVEL condition code
               extraction.


                          Special Note 1 for FLSMFJOB

               It was originally thought that the SMF type 30 subtype
               5 (Job termination record) that is used for JOBLEVEL
               reporting would have multiple completion sections.
               That is currently not true (z/OS 1.9).  Neither does
               the system place the highest return code in the single
               section that is created for the record.  It is actually
               much more complicated than that.  The rules on JOBLEVEL
               condition codes are as follows (I think):

               1.  The return code on the JOBLEVEL record usually
                   shows the return code from the last step that
                   was executed.

               2.  If the job ends where the last step did not
                   abend but an abend occurred in the job prior
                   to the last step then a return code of S000
                   will be shown.  This is true even if the abend
                   was a user abend instead of a system abend.

               3.  If the last step executed was either bypassed
                   due to condition codes (FLUSH) or failed with
                   a JCL error then the return code will be either
                   0000 or S000 depending on whether or not a
                   prior step had abended.

               The utility was updated to scan for the highest return
               code if multiple completion sections are ever present.
               For now, it looks like only a single section is there.

               The bottom line is this.  The return code on the
               JOBLEVEL report has relatively little vlaue as/of
               Z/OS 1.9.


                          Special Note 2 for FLSMFJOB

               The change for "CPUTIMEFRACTS" created the
               situation whenE CPU time can have two different
               display lengths.  When "CPUTIMEFRACTS" is
               specified the CPU time will be displayed as 10
               digits in length.  Without "CPUTIMEFRACTS" the CPU
               time will be displayed as 7 digits in length.  The
               longer length for the CPU time display when
               "CPUTIMEFRACTS" is specified would cause the
               default print line to exceed 133 characters in
               length and fail with a U048 abend.  To eliminate
               this situation I removed the fields region-below
               and region-above from the default list.  They have
               less significance than they had 15 or 20 years
               ago.  The unintended consequence is that anyone
               who may be parsing the output from the utility may
               have to change their routine or use the PRINT=
               control statements below without the
               "CPUTIMEFRACTS" option.

               PRINT=JOBNAME,JOBNO,SGDATE,STIME,SYSID,PSTEP,JSTEP
               PRINT=PROGRAM,USERID,CCODE,ELAPSED,CPUTIME,RGNB,RGNA
               PRINT=EXCP,CPUPCT,JOBTYPE

     FLSMFDSN  Corrected an issue with the day-of-the-week selection
               option.

  Changes dated 07/02/12

  Entries updated:

     FLSMFJOB  Added support for the ZAAP and ZIIP specialty engines.

               New keywords were added to allow selection of ZAAP CPU
               time, ZIIP CPU time, and the combined total of the two.
               The selection process is identical to the CPUTIME
               selection process that has long been in place.  The
               selection keywords are ZAAP>, ZAAP<, ZIIP>, ZIIP<,
               SPEC>, and SPEC<.  SPEC is the combined total of the
               ZAAP and ZIIP CPU time fields.  Note that ZAAP, ZIIP,
               or SPEC must be part of a PRINT= specification to be
               seen.  By default it will not be included on the report.

               This version has been branded release 8.0 and that
               designation will be seen in the report header.  Also,
               this utility allows a data output file called DATAOUT.
               The speciality engine support added information to this
               file.  Because of this it now has a record length of
               200 instead of 160.  Make any necessary adjustments if
               you are using the DATAOUT facility.  The new fields
               were added to the end of the record.

