1   13/12/94                                 SHADOW / SHADUP    1/1

                     -----------------------------
                       S H A D O W - S H A D U P
                     -----------------------------

 New ISPF application : Encrypt-Decrypt data-sets facility.
 ----------------------
 Note :   the Encryption/Decryption process uses a couple of keys to
 ------   warrant the data against any piratical actions.
 SHADUP : this is the action you must do to define, add or modify your
 -------- secret keys (as soon as it starts a panel prompts you).
          The first time you want use the SHADOW facility (or if by
          accident you have destroy it) you must enter
          YES to get a copy of the keys-table symbolic module, and
          YES to edit it with your couples of keys (explanations about
          how to do it are given at the beginning of the symbolic).
          Otherwise, when you want just add or modify some couples of
          keys, enter respectively NO and YES.
          If you just need to re-link it as it is, enter twice NO.
 SHADOW : as soon as the first SHADUP run complete, you may enter this
 -------- process to encrypt and/or decrypt data-set's members or
          sequential data-sets using any one couple of keys predefined
          by SHADUP process.
          This mechanism assures you to never encrypt a data-set member
          or a sequential data-set giving a wrong unviewable typed key
          which means a good bye your data when done.
          Obviously, at the time you decrypt, you must remember the
          couple of keys you have used to encrypt a data-set member or
          a sequential data-set. But, hopefully the decrypt is not
          dangerous, because if you give it a wrong couple of keys,
          you are always placed in edit on the resulting data-set
          member or sequential data-set, so if bad, you have only to
          enter CANCEL in the command line, and the data are not stored
          back (retry with another couple of keys until the good one is
          found, and good luck if there are a good many|).
          If erroneously you enter END in the command line, so the data
          are stored back, immediately encrypt with that same couple of
          keys which restore the data as they were.
          In the same way, when a processing error occurs during the
          encrypt or decrypt operation, a CANCEL is done to not destroy
          the original data.
