PDSEGBAK is a rexx utility that utilizes the PDSEGENI REXX function
and ISPF services to make a complete backup of a PDSE V2 that has
members with generations, and then provides the ability to restore
that backup.

NOTE 1: If the backup PDS does not have generations then an error
        message will be generated as this is not the best utility to
        process datasets without member generations defined.

NOTE 2: The target PDS for both backup and restore must NOT exist as
        it will be dynamically allocated as needed.

Backup will create a new PDS based on the space allocations and DCB
for the source PDSE. It will then copy all the members with their
generations into a backup PDS. The backup PDS can then be processed
by any existing utility that can process a PDS without fear of
having the member generations lost.

Three special members in the backup PDS are $ALLOC and $INDEX.

   $ALLOC contains the maxgen specification of the original PDSE so
   that the PDSE can be recreated during the restoration process.

   $BACKUP contains the backup report.

   $INDEX contains a list of all members with their backup member
   names. This is used during the restoration process. The members
   are created in the correct sequence so that after restoration the
   base member will be the correct base member and the relative
   generations will be their original relative generation. The
   absolute generation number will be lost but the key is to use is
   the relative generation (right?).

The member names within the backup PDS are special members that
retain all the ISPF statistics of the original PDSE.

Restore will read in the $ALLOC member to pick up the MAXGEN
specification so that it can allocate a new PDSE with that MAXGEN
value. It will then read in the $INDEX member and use ISPF LMCOPY to
copy each backup member into the restore target PDSE in sequence in
order to retain the correct relative generation sequence.

Before the target dataset is allocated the $ALLOC MAXGEN value is
compared to the system MAXGENS_LIMIT value. If the system value is
greater than the $ALLOC value then a warning message is issued and
the target dataset is allocated using the system limit. NOTE: This
could result in lost generations.

PDSEGBAK can be run without options under ISPF and will display a
prompting ISPF Panel to assist with performing the backup or restore.
It can also be run in batch using the TMP with all the appropriate
ISPF allocations (see member SAMPBR for sample JCL for this).

The command syntax to run outside of the dialog is:

 Syntax:    %pdsegbak input output option

            input  is either the pdse with member/gens
                   or the backup pds
            output is the target dataset for backup or
                   restore.  this dataset will be
                   allocated based on the input dataset
            option is:   backup or restore

            If no parameters, or just a input parm, and running
            under ISPF in the foreground then display a prompting
            panel
