)F
SAL, short for Show ALlocations, shows how all your files and datasets
are allocated.


Here is a description of the information shown:

      DDNAME:  Data definition name -- the name used in a program,
               to say where the program is to read or write.
               (When SAL lists a dataset without a DDNAME, the
               DDNAME associated with it is the first one above it.)

DATASET NAME:  The dataset name is the name used by the computer's
               operating system to find data files.

       STAT.:  Dataset status.  OLD means you have control of the
               dataset, no one else can use it, and when you write to
               the dataset you'll wipe out the previous version.  SHR
               means you will share the dataset with another job or
               user who also allocates the dataset as SHR -- this
               would be used when you're only reading the dataset.
               MOD says that when you write to the dataset, you'll
               stick the data at the end of what was there before, so
               you'll still have the old data, too.

      N-DISP:  Normal disposition.  This says what the computer's
               operating system will do with the data file when
               you LOGOFF normally or free the dataset.  DELETE
               means the dataset will be deleted.  KEEP means
               that it will be kept.  CATLG means it will be kept
               and cataloged.

     DS-TYPE:  Dataset type -- whether the dataset is a TERMINAL, or
               a print dataset (SYSOUT), or a DUMMY dataset.  Data
               written to a DUMMY dataset is thrown away.


Note:  SAL writes her information to the SYSPRINT DDNAME, so you
       can send the information to a dataset or printer by
       reallocating SYSPRINT. (It expects a sequential dataset
       with RECFM=FBA, LRECL=121, if you send output to a dataset.)



ERROR CODES:  If SYSPRINT isn't allocated correctly, you'll probably
get an x13 abend code.  The return code is 0 when SAL works
successfully.


)X SYNTAX:
              SAL


  Options  - none
  Defaults - none
  Alias    - none, but LISTALC command is similar.
)O
