OS  (On Screen)

On Screen allows users to view sequential files, PDSs, PDSEs, and VSAM
files of most types, VTOCs and storage.

The purpose of On Screen is to allow data to not only be viewed in
plain text, but also to be 'formatted'.  The design of On Screen allows
new formats to be added easily.  Some types of data common to most all
MVS (OS/390, z/OS, or whatever it is called now) systems like SMF are
already known (at least some SMF record types).

Displaying storage or a VSAM component using BSAM requires APF
authorization.  All other OS functions require no special priviledges.
To allow OS to run APF authorized only when needed, OS dynamically
turns APF authorization on and off.



Displaying data from a data set

The utility determines a data set's DSORG dynamically.  That is it
determines if the data set is sequential, a PDS, VSAM, etc and uses
the appropriate access method.

If a PDS or PDSE is referenced without a member name, a list of the
members is displayed.  PDS(/E)s with RECFM U are assumed to be
"loadlibs", all other RECFMs are "non loadlibs".

Data from the data set or directory is read into a data space before
being displayed.  This has its advantages and disadvantes.  On the
plus side, file I/O is only required once.  You can scroll forward,
backward, reference anything read into the data space with the system
doing any required I/O via system paging which has less overhead and
is faster than file I/O.  On the negative side, if the data is too
large to be loaded into the data space, only a portion can be viewed
at a time.  There are options on invocation that allow you to specify
records to skip, number of records to read, and for VSAM files you
can use FROMKEY and TOKEY or RBA for positioning.  Why put data in a
dataspace?  Once the data is in the dataspace, it can be manipulated
in all sorts of ways without regard data's source.  That is, it
doesn't matter whether the source was a sequential file, VSAM, a VTOC,
HFS, whatever and we don't have to worry about I/O.
The system defualt for the dataspace's size is 239 pages.  I intend
to add a keyword to allow users to request a larger dataspace.



FORMATs

When a sequential file is first displayed, it is shown using the
default format which is BROWSE.  PDS(/E) directories are displayed
as member lists.  You can change which format is being used by
entering "FORMAT nnnnnnnn" as a primary command.


Formats are defined by members in the OSFORMAT library.

As supplied the formats available are:
 BROWSE        Displays data 'a-record-at-a-time' that allows up, down,
               left, and right scrolling.

 DIR           Used to display non-loadlib PDS(/E) directories

 HEX           Displays data as two hex characters per byte.  The
               display allows scrolling up, down, left, and right.

 LDIR          Used to display loadlib PDS(/E) directories.

 RVTOC         Displays VTOC info in "raw" form.

 SMF           Assumes the data is SMF data.  Most SMF record types
               have customized displays.  Some records have multiple
               "screens".  "up" and "down" scrolls records, "left"
               and "right" change "screens" for a given record.


 VHEX          Displays data in 'vertical'  hex.  Each record is

 VTOC          Displays data sets on a volume.




Reading a VSAM data set component (the index or data) using a DCB
(this is usually done by a 'S', 'B', or 'V' line command from a
VTOC display) requires APF authorization.









Messages

I tried to keep the hard-coded message text to a minimum.  Since I
am only (somewhat) literate in Enligsh (United States variety),
the only messages provided now are English.  If anyone wants to
take on translating the messages, the source for US english is
in source OSMSGUS.  The language you use can be customized on a
user by user basis.  The options are kept in the users ISPPROF.










Other odds/ends
As of now, On Screen depends on SPF.  I have been looking at
'faking out' the SPF functions.

I work at a JES3 shop.  We don't have any JES2 SMF data so I don't
have much motivation for worrying about formatting any SMF records
that would be created by JES2.

On Screen really doesn't 'know' much about tapes.  In the last several
years the use of tape has declined drastically here.  The older
round-reels were notorious for causing problems.  The main purpose
for developing DITTO was for messing around with tapes.  By the
way DO NOT USE DITTO on any system later than about MVS 3 (ESA).
On anything later, DITTO CLOBBERS something and the system becomes
unusable requiring an IPL.


Commands can be recalled via a question mark (?).
Up to the last 20 commands can be recalled.


You can see the contents of various fields in the common area by
entering DEBUG as a primary command.







