OS now displays storage.

Displaying storage requires APF authorization.

OS allows you to display many system control blocks either in
unformatted or a formatted form.

To display storage, start OS by entering "os stor" or "os storage".

OS will display storage from your home address space starting at
address 0.

You can type "??" for a list of commands available.

One of the commands is "CB".  "CB" tells OS that the current
area displayed is a control block with a known format.  Enter
"CB ?" to get a list of the "known" control blocks.


For example
  Start OS, enter "os stor"
  Enter "ASCB".  The current address will be set to your ASCB's address.
  Now enter "CB ASCB".  The FIELDs in the ASCB will be formatted.

To switch to another address space you can either
  Enter "ACT", then "select" the address space
  Enter "ASID xxxx" where "xxxx" is the hex ASID for the
     address space you want.

The fields on the "raw" storage display are "point and shoot".
For an example
  Start OS, enter "OS STOR"
  You will be viewing storage at address 0 (the PSA).
  The address of the CVT is always at 16 (hex 10).
  put the cursor on the first word on the second line and press enter
  the display will now show the cvt in unformatter form.
  type "cb cvt"
  the fields of the cvt will be displayed


You can set the current address by typing the address in the command
area.  For example, assume located a control block at address 3DCF210C.
Just type in "3DCF210C" on the command line and press enter.


Many of the address fields on formatted displays are point-and-shoot.
Start OS.  Enter "os stor"
You will be shown the PSA in raw form.
Type "cb psa"
The fields of the PSA will be shown in a formatted form..
Put the cursor on the line with field "FLCCVT" and press enter.
The CVT will be displayed in a formatted form.



The idea is that when displaying a control block in formatted form,
that when a field is an address, it will be 'point and shoot'.  Also
if the address refers to a control block that OS "knows", it will
remain in formatted mode.  If the control block is not "known", the
display will revert to "raw" mode.



As of now, OS does not update storage so the best way to learn
how to use the STOR display is to "play" around with it.
