OS now allows you to display storage.

For authorized users, I want to allow OS to display any areas of any
address space.  This requires APF authorization and at times key 0.
Allowing this data to be displayed (not to mention the use of APF
authorization and key 0) can be a security exposure.  I intend to add
some security (RACF calls) to allow the use of this function to be
restricted.

To start up the storage display, start OS by entering: "OS STOR"
or "OS STORAGE".

The storage display function will initially be in "raw storage" mode.

The display will default to your home address space and address 0,
the address of the PSA.

You can go "directly" to a number of system control blocks by entering
the name of the control block in the primary command area.  For example,
enter "ASCB" as a primary command.  To see the "known" control blocks,
enter "??" as a primary command.

Just as when viewing a data set, the purpose of OS is to allow data
to be custom formatted.  The design allows new control blocks to be
added easily.  To switch from the "raw" storage mode to formatted
mode, enter "CB xxxxx" where xxxxx is the name of the control block.
For example if you are displaying a ASCB in "raw" mode, enter "CB ASCB"
as a primary command.  To list the control blocks that have custom
formatting available, enter "CB ??" as a primary command.



On the raw mode display, all fields are "point and shoot".


On the custom format displays of control blocks, most address fields
are also "point and shoot".  For example on the formatted display of
the PSA, field FLCCVT (at displacment X'10') is the address of the CVT.
So you can put the cursor anywhere on the same line where field FLCCVT
is displayed and press enter.  The formatted display of the CVT will
be displayed.


The idea is that for control blocks that have customized displays,
that if a field is "point and shoot" and it has a customized display,
"point and shoot" will take you from one control block to another
with the data in a formatted form.  If a field is "point and shoot",
but has not been added to the list of formatted control blocks, the
display will change to the "raw" form.



You can switch from raw form to a formatted display at any time by
just entering "CB xxxxx".  You can switch from the formatted display
back to raw form at any time by entering "STOR".



Bookmarks.
During your storage investigation, you may want to "bookmark"
certain points.  To set a bookmark, enter ".name" where the "."
is a keyword and "name" is the name of the bookmark.  To return
to a point you have bookmarked, enter "..name" where the ".." is
a keyword and "name" is the name of bookmark you created earlier.
To list the bookmarks you have created, enter "bookmark" as a
primary command.  Bookmarking saves the current address space,
space name, address, displacment, and format (raw or a control block).
Returning to a bookmark restores the address space, space name,
address, displacement, and format.  If you can replace a bookmark
by entering ".name" a second time.  The second bookmark completely
replaces the first.







_______________   A few scenarios   ______________________
Start OS.  Enter "OS STOR".
           You should be in raw mode at address 0.
Change to formatted PSA display.
           Enter "CB PSA".
           Fields of the PSA will be displayed in formatted form.

Scroll up and down.
           You can scroll the fields by pressing PF7 and/or PF8.

Go to the CVT.
           Enter "CVT".
           The fields of the CVT will be displayed in formatted form.

Switch to raw mode.
           Enter "STOR".
           The data will be displayed in dump type format.

Go back to the PSA.
           Enter "PSA".
           The PSA should be displayed in raw or dump format.

Use "POINT and SHOOT".
           Put the cursor anywhere on the same line as field FLCCVT
           and press enter.
           The CVT should be displayed in raw or dump format.

Switch to formatted mode.
           Enter "CB CVT" and press enter.
           The display should change back to formatted mode showing
           the fields of the CVT.






Displaying data in other address spaces

When you first start the OS storage display, you will be displaying
data from your home address space.  You can switch to another address
space in a couple of ways.  One is to display the active regions.


Start OS by entering "OS STOR".

Display the active regions by entering "ACT" and pressing enter.
A scrollable list of the active regions will be displayed.  You can
select the region you want be entering a non-blank as a line command.
When an address space is selected, the display will be that region's
ASCB in "raw" mode.  You can display the active regions at any time.

The second way to change which address spaces is to enter "ASID xx"
where xx is the ASID (in hex) for the desired address space.







Fixes I already know about

The list of available commands is either the main menu's or a sub
function's at a time.  What I want is to allow a sub functions list
of commands to be listed followed by the main menu's commands.
Any duplicated commands (any sub function command that is also a
main function command would need to be suppressed).

Allow the STOR function to be started as a new "session".  Right now
the storage display must be started as the first or only session...
you can't have two or more storage display sessions... setting the
secondary address space could get messy.

Add additional control block formats.
