VSE/ESA - the way to the future

The announcement of VSE/ESA has brought great relief for
many VSE users.  IBM has finally recognized the value of its
22,000+ VSE licence holders, and there now seems no doubt
that VSE is going to be vigorously supported for some years
yet, possibly into the next century, both as a mid-range
operating system in its own right and as the entry system to
IBM's mainframe line.

VSE Release 5 - VSE/ESA - indicates a sea change in IBM's
attitude to VSE.  Previous releases have represented grudging
concessions by IBM to pressures from users, but VSE/ESA is
altogether different and lifts many key restraints of previous
versions as well as introducing several new elements to VSE:

o      The number of address spaces that VSE can handle has
      been increased dramatically with the introduction of
      dynamic partitions.  Dynamic partitions are a new type of
      partition which exist only for as long as they are needed,
      and up to 200 of them can be used in addition to the
      existing 12 static partitions.  The 12 static partitions still
      reside in their 9 address spaces, and each of the new
      dynamic partitions exists in its own address space; thus

      VSE/ESA can now support 209 address spaces and 212
      partitions.

o      Real memory support has been increased to 384MB (from
      16MB in VSE/SP), which implies 31-bit addressing within
      the VSE supervisor.

o      I/O support has been improved, and VSE/ESA can handle
      up to 256 channels, including the new ESCON channels,
      on the appropriate processors.

o      Native support for 3390/3990 devices has been introduced;
      this includes dynamic path select/reconnect and four-
      channel pathing.

o      All uniprocessor ES/9000s are supported directly, although
      on the water-cooled 9021 models support is available only
      under VM, or in logical partitioning mode under PR/SM.
      On multiprocessor models (air-cooled and water cooled),
      VM or  PR/SM is needed.

o      POWER (on ESA-capable processors) and VTAM (on all
      processors) can be moved from shared storage into their
      own private partitions.  Potentially this frees up 2-4MB per
       address space, and with up to 209 address spaces available,
      can yield a very substantial increase in the amount of space
      available to users' applications.  However, note that it's
      already possible to hold VTAM in a private area using
      CICS MRO and further savings would not be available to
      users already employing this technique.

Release 5 has not raised the constraint of 16MB per address
space, although there's a Statement of Direction for support of
up to 2GB per address space.

Alongside these improvements within VSE itself, there have
been substantial enhancements to other software commonly
used in the VSE environment, notably VM and CICS.  VM is
widely used as a means of working round VSE constraints, and
the new unified version of VM, VM/ESA, can still be used for
this purpose with the new VSE.  However, the greater capacity
and performance of VSE/ESA and the availability of PR/SM
throughout the ES/9000 range will make VM unnecessary for
many users, and there's likely to be a reduction in the number
of VM licences as the base of VSE/ESA and ES/9000 users
grows.

In contrast to the impact of VM/ESA, the latest CICS
announcements are likely to play a key role in VSE sites.  The
new release of CICS - CICS/VSE 2.1 - offers improved LU6.2
and cooperative processing support, availability of CICS/XRF
(eXtended Recovery Facility), COBOL II (the SAA version of
the language), and the C language (C will be available at a so-
far unspecified later date).  MRO performance is also claimed
to be better.  CICS/XRF (which originated right at the top end
of the IBM range as part of IMS) is a particularly welcome
addition to the VSE environment; it creates a 'mirror' CICS
system synchronized with the main system which can take over
immediately in the event of a failure in the primary system.  It
can also be used for planned hardware and/or software
maintenance by allowing the back-up CICS system to be used
while the main system is being maintained.


