'Secret' POWER parameters

We recently upgraded our VSE software from 2.1.5 to 4.1.2
(via 4.1.0 and 4.1.1).  During the course of generating a job
stream through the Interactive Interface, we noticed a question
for 'time event scheduling'.  For the sake of experimentation,
we replaced the default 2 with a 1 and were shown several
other screens and options.  After the system generated the JCL,
we were surprised to find some previously unseen parameters
on the * $$ JOB card.  Next we checked our new 4.1 POWER
Installation and Operations guide.  These new parameters were
unlisted.  After several more trips through the Interactive
Interface, we were able to piece together a fairly accurate list
of these undocumented parameters.

Although we haven't tried them all, we have used quite a few
and found them very handy for certain types of job.  We use
them to start batch PRINTLOG jobs automatically at the end of
each shift, to run a weekly EREP print and file offload, and to
run periodic reports for our CICS monitoring facility.

One interesting anomaly we have found is that the job must
reside in the RDR queue with DISP=K.  The RDR queue
screen on the Interactive Interface will show the start dates and
times for these jobs.  They will also show in the 'wait for run
subqueue' (option 5) on the manage batch queues screen.  If,
for some reason, the disposition is changed to an L, the start
dates and times are removed from the screen.  (A subsequent
PALTER command back to K will restore them to pending
start status.)

As far as we know, these parameters work in Releases 4.1.1
and 4.1.2, but beyond that we are uncertain.  If only we could
now figure out what the 'RESTART=' parameter on the * $$
JOB card does!

The following is a list of the parameters and their uses as we
have found them and some examples.

DUETIME=hhmm      to release the job at a specific time

      hh   = the hour (24 hour clock)
      mm = the minute.

For example:

      DUETIME=2330  -  to release a job at 11:30pm

DUEDATE=mmddyy       to release a job on a specific day (for
      a onetime run for instance)
      mm = month
      dd   = day
      yy   = year.

For example:

      DUEDATE=040591 -  to release a job on 5 April 1991.

DUEDAY=DAILY -  to release a job every day at a specific time.

DUEDAY=(SUN, MON, TUE, WED, THU, FRI, SAT)

      to release a job on a specific day or several specific days of the week.

DUEDAY=(1,2,3,4,5,6....29,30,31)

            to release a job on a specific day of the month or
            several specific days of the month.

DUEMONTH=(1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12)

            use this parameter in combination with the numeric
            DUEDAY to release a job on a specific day (or days)
            of a specific month (or months).

For example:

      DUEDAY=(1,15),DUEMONTH(1-12)

            will release the job every month on the 1st and the 15th.

Note: DUETIME is used in conjunction with the other
parameters (DUEDAY, DUEDATE, DUEMONTH).

Kevin E Crandall
Manager of Technical Services
Victory Markets Inc (USA)                   c Victory Markets Inc 1991

