POWER time event scheduling exposed

In the June 1991 issue of VSE Update, Kevin Crandall noted
some new POWER operands concerning time event scheduling
which were previously undocumented. We are currently
upgrading to VSE/ESA 1.1, and I am happy to say that the
feature is now fully documented in POWER Version 5 Release
1's Administration and Operation manual, as well as in the
new, hand-sized VSE/ESA Quick Reference booklet (which,
by the way, includes command syntax summaries for
Advanced Functions, POWER, VSAM, and ICCF).

Kevin is correct; time event scheduling is supported starting at
VSE/SP 4.1.1, as stated on page 104 of the above manual. As
far as the remark about wishing to know what the
'RESTART=' parameter was, I can only assume that he meant
the new 'RERUN=' parameter instead, which is also a part of
time event scheduling, as I could find no documentation for a
'RESTART=' operand of the '* $$ JOB' card.

The following highlights the information available in the
Administration and Operation manual.

Time event scheduling operands are not required, but if any are
used, at least DUETIME is required.

The operands are: DUETIME; DUEDATE or DUEDAY
(mutually exclusive); DUEMONTH; and RERUN.

DUETIME=hhmm specifies time in military (24-hour)
notation. Leading zeros are required.

DUEDATE=mmddyy or DUEDATE=ddmmyy, depending on
how your system date format is set up (in your IPL procedure).
Note that there are no delimiters (such as slashes or dashes),
and leading zeros are required. If you need to specify a format
different from the originating system (perhaps the job is going
to be transmitted to a system with a differing date format, or
you're not sure), then use either 'extended' format
DUEDATE=(mmddyy,M) or DUEDATE=(ddmmyy,D) to
explicitly state the format, where D means day-first, and M
means month-first.

Years with values 89 to 99 are considered 1989 to 1999 (20th
century), and year values 00 to 88 are treated as 2000 to 2088
(21st century).

DUEDAY=DAILY for every-day use, or DUEDAY=(name-
list), or DUEDAY=(number-list) for specific days. Name-list
contains 3-character abbreviations of the days of the week;
SUN, MON, TUE, WED, THU, FRI, SAT. Alternatively,
number-list contains one or more day-of-the-month numbers,
such as 31 for the 31st day. Either form of the list can be
delimited by commas and/or dashes. For example,
DUEDAY=(MON-WED,FRI) means Monday to Wednesday,
then not again until Friday.

DUEDAY is mutually exclusive with DUEDATE. Also,
DUEDAY can be used in conjunction with DUEMONTH, but
DUEDATE cannot be used with DUEMONTH, according to
the documented syntax.

An interesting and helpful point: if a day number is specified
for a month without that many days, it is assumed to mean the
last day of the month. Thus, DUEMONTH=(1-12),
DUEDAY=(31) would assure the time event to expire on the
last day of every month, regardless of leap years.

DUEMONTH=(number-list) is very similar to
DUEDAY=(number-list), except, of course, that it specifies the
month(s)-of-the-year: 1 for January to 12 for December. Again,
commas and/or dashes may be included.
DUEMONTH=(1,3,5,10-12) means January, March, May,
then October to December.

RERUN, which defaults to RERUN=YES, tells POWER what
to do in case a time event job that was put in the queue prior to
POWER coming down (intentionally or not) 'expires'
(becomes eligible to be run) during the outage time period. If
POWER comes back up the same day as it came down,
RERUN is ignored, to prevent undue complications arising
from very short outages (perhaps only a few minutes).
Otherwise, RERUN=YES causes the job to become
immediately eligible as soon as POWER regains control, as if
the expiry has just occurred. With RERUN= NO, you inform
POWER that the expired run is to be ignored.

The default original disposition and the final disposition of a
time event job depends on whether it is a 'one-time shot' or a
multiple-release job. For the one-timers, the default is
DISP=D, and the job is deleted after running. If the JOB card
specifies DISP=K, it becomes DISP=L after execution, just as
you would expect for a non-timed job.

For multiple-event jobs, however, the default is DISP=K, to
agree with the multiple-run intent. Unlike one-timers, however,
a DISP=K returns to DISP=K, not DISP=L, after running, so
that the operator does not manually have to make it
dispatchable again. The reason is that a non-dispatchable job
(DISP=H or DISP=L) is not eligible to run even if its time of
expiry goes by. Only DISP=D and DISP=K jobs are processed
by the feature.

If a job is submitted with a time/date that has already passed,
the event immediately expires and the job is eligible to run
(assuming it is dispatchable). Note, however, that if you
submit a job with DUETIME=1700,DUEDAY=(FRIDAY) and
you submit it at 5:01pm on a Friday, the job will not
'immediately expire', but will instead wait until the following
Friday.

In regard to error detection: the year value of the DUEDATE
operand must be greater than or equal to 10 years prior to the
current year, and less than or equal to 3 years past the current
year, or else POWER assumes a mistake and puts the job in a
HOLD status and issues message number 1R37I. However, if
the operator places the job back into a status of DISP=D or
DISP=K, POWER honours the parameters.

Additionally, if error(s) are detected in any of the time event
operands, all of the operands are ignored and the job is placed
in a HOLD status, and message number 1R36I is issued.

For a display of expiry time/dates, the usual D RDR command
includes the field 'RUN=hh:mm mm/dd' for non-expired jobs,
and 'EXP=hh:mm mm/dd' for expired (but not yet running)
jobs in the queue. Time event jobs that are not eligible to run
(such as those in DISP=H) show 'RUN=--', where the dashes
indicate 'not applicable'. To also see the original time event
operands coded on the job card at submission, the fuller
command D RDR,FULL=YES displays an additional 1 or 2
lines per job entry. For jobs in the XMT queue, the D
XMT,FULL=YES shows the additional 1 or 2 lines, but not
RUN= or EXP=, since the latter only applies to RDR queue
entries.

Another command, D WRUN, will display those time event
jobs 'waiting to run' (eligible but not yet expired).

After a time-event job is run, if it is put back in the job queue
for another timed release (because of DISP=K), the POWER
job number changes.

I hope that this information helps those VSE shops that are at
4.1.1 and simply don't have access to the ESA documentation.
I would assume that all points mentioned here are usable, but
you may want to try some of the commands, such as D WRUN
and D RDR,FULL=YES, to be sure. I am certain that this
feature of POWER will be a tremendous help to many shops,
as it will be to ours as we begin to incorporate it into our
operations strategy.

Lawrence Holder
Senior Programmer/Analyst
The University of Tennessee at Martin (USA)                 c UTMCC 1992

