Using IOCP with VSE

Although it may be new to many VSE environments, running
the IBM I/O Configuration Program (IOCP) is mandatory for
all ES/9000 processors. IBM dedicated most of a Field
Network Television (FNT) satellite broadcast to the subject on
2 April 1992. Video tapes of the broadcast are available
through IBM for North American customers.

IOCP defines the I/O configuration to the Dynamic Channel
Subsystem. Perhaps best envisioned as a processor, the
Dynamic Channel Subsystem controls all channel activity,
defines resource distribution in LPAR (PR/SM logical
partition) mode, and associates a unique device number to all
I/O devices. To provide these functions, it requires specific
data about the I/O configuration attached to the system
(channel speed, type of control unit, and type of I/O device).

An IOCP is required for any processor running in LPAR mode
or running in XA or ESA mode. It is also required to run in
S/370 mode on a 3090 and 308x. All ES/9000 processors
require an IOCP because all ES/9000s run in LPAR mode.
IOCP is a customer responsibility, unlike the equivalent setting
of UCWs taken care of by an IBM Customer Engineer on
systems such as the 4381.

Despite the work involved, an IOCP does provide some
benefits. The Dynamic Channel Subsystem supports Dynamic
Path Selection (DPS), Dynamic Path Reconnection (DPR), 256
channels, and up to four paths from a uniprocessor to each
device (twice that number on a dyadic). VSE supports only
uniprocessors at the present time. DPS means the channel
subsystem figures out the optimum path to a device, while
DPR means that an I/O can be initiated on one path and return
on another. The exception to all this is the integrated I/O
subsystem of the 9221 processors, which supports only one
path to a device.

What does it all cost? The Dynamic Channel Subsystem
requires a Hardware Systems Area (HSA) of 2MB to 5MB of
real storage. HSA contains the information defining the I/O
subsystem.

When I/O becomes the bottleneck, the use of multiple paths
really pays off in performance. Therefore, it makes sense to
plan configurations that provide the maximum number of paths
possible. A physical diagram is the best method; this can be
done by hand or with a computer-based tool. One PC-based
tool, designed specifically for working with IOCPs, will read
an IOCP and draw the diagram.


CHPID

To the newcomer, the most incomprehensible thing about
IOCPs is the CHPID. Pronounced chipid, the CHannel Path
IDentifier is an IBM-predetermined fixed number that indicates
which slot and the position within that slot where a channel
card is physically installed. In a 9221 rack-mounted ES/9000,
looking from the back, the card slots are numbered, left to
right, 10 to 18. Slot 10 is where the power card must be
installed, and each remaining slot can have a single or triple
channel card installed to support parallel or ESCON channels.
One to three I/O bus link cards are supported by the 9221 and
are installed working backwards from slot 18. If present, the
Sysplex Timer separates the I/O bus link and parallel/ESCON
channel cards.

CHPIDs for I/O bus link cards begin at X'00' at the top of slot
18, with a maximum of X'FF' indicating the bottom of slot 16.
For parallel and ESCON channel cards, CHPIDs begin at X'20'
at the top of slot 11. X'21' and X'22' are assigned to the lower
two channels in slot 11 if a triple channel card is installed in
that location; X'21' and X'22' are never used if a single channel
card is installed in slot 11. In either case slot 12 begins at
X'23', meaning the maximum CHPID would be X'37' at the
bottom of slot 18.

Air-cooled frame ES/9000 models, the 9121, have an even
more confusing CHPID configuration. In the base frame of a
uniprocessor, both LOC 1 and LOC 2 can contain a maximum
of 12 parallel and four ESCON channels. The parallel channels
in LOC 1 have CHPIDs of X'00' to X'0B', and LOC 2 X'0C' to
X'17'. ESCON channels reverse the process. In LOC 2,
CHPIDs begin at X'18' and continue to X'1B'. LOC 1 has X'1C'
to X'1F'.

In summary, the CHPID is a fixed two-digit hexadecimal
number, determined by a channel's location within the cabinet
and is unaffected by the presence, absence, or size of any other
card in the cabinet. Hard-coding a number like CHPID in the
IOCP makes some sense given the relative permanence of a
channel's location in the cabinet. In practice, new cards get
added, but rarely are existing cards moved.


IOCP DEFINITION

The IOCP takes channel path definitions, control unit
definitions, and I/O device definitions as input and produces an
I/O Configuration DataSet (IOCDS), creates subchannel
numbers, and provides configuration reports as output. As
might be expected, input looks very much like Assembler
macro calls, and must follow the rules of Assembler: ie labels
in column 1, no spaces after commas, single quotes around
strings with spaces or special characters, unlabelled statements
may not start in column 1, continuation is in column 72, and
continued statements must start in column 16. In certain
situations, the number of parentheses indicated in the IBM
documentation may look superfluous, but is usually required.

An IOCP must be done before the first IML. The obvious
question is how? There are five methods of IOCP generation
available, the first two of which are stand-alone. Since the
processor controller is really a PS/2 microcomputer, IOCP
parameters can be specified by a series of screens in a manner
similar to the setup of UCWs done on some

S/370 processors. The associated software is shipped with the
processor complex on diskettes associated with the processor
controller.

Given a card reader or another computer with a compatible tape
drive, IOCP input in 80-byte card image fixed format can be
assembled stand-alone by microcode and stored in the specified
IOCDS. Unless the tape method is used on a processor where
IOCP syntax checking is possible, this approach can be
tedious.

If an operational VSE, MVS, or VM system is available, the
typical batch process used by installations modifying IOCPs
can be used. Although the syntax checking and logical
consistency process does not guarantee it will work on the new
processor, the IOCDS can be generated. Processor support is
provided for downloading the IOCDS to the new processor.
With a tight time schedule for installation, the IOCDS could be
generated before the processor is installed. An exact hardware
configuration for the new processor would be required. It
would have to include locations of all channel cards, since this
determines CHPIDs.

If an operational processor with VSE/ESA 1.2 is available,
assistance is provided by two skeletons in VSE/ICCF library
59. SKIOCPIN is used to install the IOCP program in sub-
library PRD2.IOCP. SKIOCPCN is a sample IOCP job that
can form a base for configuration changes.

AutoGen IOCP is a tool on the 9221 service processor that
creates an input source deck for integrated I/O subsystem
channels only. By using templates of macros and the editor,
additional configuration information is added to the source file.


IOCP STATEMENTS

The three main statements in an IOCP are CHPID,
CNTLUNIT, and IODEVICE. They describe the characteristics
and connections between channels, control units, and I/O
devices respectively. Although each channel can have multiple
control units attached to it, and each control unit multiple I/O
devices attached to it, it is generally impractical to code the
hierarchy in this way. For example, a DASD control unit is
usually connected to more than one channel, but the
CNTLUNIT statement can only be coded once for each control
unit, not once under the CHPID statement of each channel to
which it is attached.

For this reason, and because each CHPID statement must
precede all CNTLUNIT statements that reference it, and each
CNTLUNIT statement must precede all IODEVICE statements
that reference it, CHPID statements are generally grouped
together first, then all CNTLUNIT statements, followed by all
IODEVICE statements.

All three statements, CHPID, CNTLUNIT, and IODEVICE,
can be specified with an optional label beginning in column 1.
Although they impart no meaning to IOCP, when used as
documentation they can be used to quickly identify the relevant
statement for a particular device.

An ID statement begins each IOCP. It names the resulting
IOCDS, allowing more than one IOCDS to be kept. The most
obvious use of this is for simplified back-out of a newly created
failing IOCDS. After all, if it is too wrong, an IPL may not be
possible. A SYSTEM= parameter allows an IOCP to generate
an IOCDS on a system other than the one where the IOCDS
will be used.

CHPID

CHPID statements are coded for each channel, with the CHPID
coded as the first parameter of the PATH=Jkeyword. Although
not needed for ES/9000, the S/370 channel number can be
coded as the second parameter for PATH= and is recommended
for documentation, especially during conversion from S/370.

TYPE= indicates the type of channel being defined. BL is for
parallel block multiplexor channels, while BY is for byte
multiplexors. CVC (formerly FX) is for ESCON routed
through an ESCON converter. CNC (formerly S) is for true
ESCON. CTC is an ESCON path used for channel-to-channel
communications to another CPU on another system, to another
LPAR, or to the other CPU of a dyadic processor. IOC is an
integrated I/O subsystem channel path. In this case, byte or
block multiplexor is determined from the I/O controller control
information.

The first parameter of PARTITION=Jindicates the name of the
LPAR that will use the channel. An optional second parameter,
REC, indicates dynamic configuration support for the channel,
allowing it to be configured to another partition. In S/370
mode, REC is required and the channel will not work without
it.

CNTLUNIT

CNTLUNIT has several keywords with missing letters, so care
is required to get it right. A system of numbering controllers
must be invented and specified with the
CUNUMBR= keyword. Each controller must be given a
unique one to five digit hexadecimal number (0000-0FFF for
VSE/ESA). For parallel (non-ESCON) control units,
PROTOCL= specifies D for directly coupled, S for 3MBps,
and S4 for 4.5 MBps. SHARED=N is the default for shared
subchannels - it means yes! Y means no and there is also a YB
specification. An appendix to the appropriate (they vary by
CPU type) IOCP User's Guide indicates the correct values of
these parameters for each control unit type.

PATH=Jindicates the CHPIDs of the channels to which the
control unit is attached. UNIT=Jis not checked by VSE, but is
required by VM and MVS. It indicates the control unit type; eg
UNIT=3880.

UNITADD=Jindicates the two hexadecimal digit unit addresses
of those I/O devices attached to this control unit. Because
devices are generally in clumps of sequentially numbered unit
addresses, a short cut is provided to eliminate the need to list
each device's unit address separately. A second parameter
indicates the (decimal) number of sequentially numbered unit
addresses. To accommodate this short cut, double parentheses
are always required. The following are equivalent:

      UNITADD=((10,4))
      UNITADD=((10),(11),(12),(13))

IODEVICE

The IODEVICE statement defines all of the I/O devices. The
ADDRESS=Jkeyword provides the same short cut that
UNITADD=Jdoes. A single IODEVICE statement can be
coded for multiple identical devices having sequentially
numbered addresses. Only one set of parentheses is required,
however, because only one set of addresses is permitted; eg
ADDRESS=(01F0,16)

CUNUMBR= must match the CUNUMBR= specification on
the CNTLUNIT statement defining the controller to which this
device is attached. This is a parenthesized list, usually of more
than one number because most I/O devices are attached to more
than one control unit for contingency purposes.
UNIT=Jspecifies the device type. STADET=Jis ignored in
S/370 mode, but used to specify whether the device is ESCON
(Y) or parallel (N). The option PATH=Jspecification indicates
the CHPID of the preferred path; this performance option is
used when a particular path is known to have lower usage.


VSE/ESA DEVICE SPECIFICATION

Bringing all of this to the VSE/ESA environment, device
numbers are four hexadecimal digits in the range 0000 to 0FFF
and are defined in the IOCP process. Running VSE/ESA in
ESA mode, ADD statements will be rejected if they contain the
S parameter to indicate channel switching. Instead, channel
switching is defined through the IOCP statements described
above.

To ease migration, IBM strongly recommends that the device
number defined in the IOCP match the current cuu address.

Remember, IODEVICE is only specified once per device in an
IOCP definition. This contrasts with previous versions of VSE
where I/O devices were specified once for each path through
which they could be accessed.

Finally, it pays to overdefine. Devices not installed will be
ignored at IPL time. When new devices are added, if they can
be accommodated through previous over-definition, the outages
related to installing and testing a new IOCP can be avoided.

Jon E Pearkins (Canada)
