PDSEGBAK and PDSEGRST are rexx utilities that utilizes the PDSEGENI REXX
function and ISPF services to make a complete backup of a PDSE V2 that
has members with generations, and then provides the ability to restore
that backup.

NOTE 1: If the backup PDS does not have generations enabled then an
        error message will be generated as this is not the best utility
        to process datasets without member generations defined.

NOTE 2: The target PDS for both backup and restore must NOT exist as
        it will be dynamically allocated as needed.

NOTE 3: There are times when PDSEGBAK will fail in batch. This occurs
        for some generations, not for base members, and is an issue
        where ISPF in batch encounters some issue that I haven't figured
        out yet. The solution is to delete the offending generation and
        then the backup should proceed to the next offending generation
        or to successful completion. I can't recreate at will and
        haven't seen anything in the ispfvcall traces.

Backup will create a new PDS based on the space allocations and DCB
for the source PDSE. It will then copy all the members with their
generations into a backup PDS. The backup PDS can then be processed
by any existing utility that can process a PDS without fear of
having the member generations lost.

Three special members in the backup PDS are $ALLOC and $INDEX.

   $ALLOC contains the maxgen specification of the original PDSE so
   that the PDSE can be recreated during the restoration process.

   $BACKUP contains the backup report generated during the backup
   process.

   $INDEX contains a list of all members with their backup member
   names. This is used during the restoration process. The members
   are created in the correct sequence so that after restoration the
   base member will be the correct base member and the relative
   generations will be their original relative generation. The
   absolute generation number will be lost but the key is to use is
   the relative generation (right?).

The member names within the backup PDS are special members that
retain all the ISPF statistics of the original PDSE.

Restore (using either PDSEGBAK or PDSEGRST) will read in the $ALLOC
member to pick up the MAXGEN specification so that it can allocate a new
PDSE with that MAXGEN value. It will then read in the $INDEX member and
use ISPF LMCOPY to copy each backup member into the restore target PDSE
in sequence in order to retain the correct relative generation sequence.

Before the target dataset is allocated the $ALLOC MAXGEN value is
compared to the system MAXGENS_LIMIT value. If the system value is
greater than the $ALLOC value then a warning message is issued and
the target dataset is allocated using the system limit. NOTE: This
could result in lost generations.

PDSEGBAK can be run without options under ISPF and will display a
prompting ISPF Panel to assist with performing the backup or restore.
It can also be run in batch using the TMP with all the appropriate
ISPF allocations (see member SAMPBR for sample JCL for this).

The command syntax to run outside of the dialog is:

 Syntax:    %pdsegbak input output option1 option2

            input  is either the pdse with member/gens
                   or the backup pds
            output is the target dataset for backup or
                   restore.  this dataset will be
                   allocated based on the input dataset
            option1 is:  backup or restore
            option2 is:  batch or null

            If no parameters, or just a input parm, and running
            under ISPF in the foreground then display a prompting
            panel

            If option2 is batch then the backup/restore report
            will be written to the terminal for online scripting
            instead of opened in ispf browse.

PDSEGRST is a improved restore utility that provides the ability to
restore to an existing, or new, PDSE. It also allows for member and/or
generation selection during the restore.

Syntax:    %pdsegrst backup-dsn target-dsn mbr gen / NEW

           backup-dsn   PDSEGEN Backup PDS
           target-dsn   PDS/PDSE to restore to
                        ** must exist **
           mbr          Member name or member pattern
           gen          Absolute or Relative Gen to
                        restore

           / NEW        allocate the target PDSE

           mbr is optional - default is all
           gen is optional - default is all generations
           / NEW is optional and may be any non-blank char

Usage Notes:
          1. If restoring to a PDS or PDSE without
             generations then only the base (gen 0)
             will be restored.
          2. If gen is not specified then all generations
             will be restored starting with the oldest to
             the newest. This retains the relative
             generations number.
          3. The absolute generation number cannot be
             retained on restoration.
          4. If the member already exists in the target
             then the existing member/generations will
             be pushed up the relative generation range
             until they roll out.
          5. If the option / NEW is specified then the
             target PDSE will be allocated using the DCB
             and space of the backup PDS/PDSE and using
             the MAXGEN found in the Backup $ALLOC member
