K** This is an attempt to create a MVS/QuickRef entry for
K** PDSEGEN - still in very early alpha
K**
KCAD C=PDSEGEN D='PDSEGEN ISPF Dialog'
KCAP V='CBTTAPE.ORG' P=PDSEGEN R=* C=PDSEGEN
KCPY V='CBTTAPE.ORG' C=NO
K V='CBTTAPE.ORG' P=PDSEGEN R='*' I=INTRO
 The PDSEGEN ISPF Dialog will present the user with a list of all members
 of their PDSE, including all generations.  There are many commands
 including Copy and Compare, and many line selection options available,
 including Browse, Edit, View, Compare, Delete, J (submit), Promote,
 Rename and Recover.  The list of members will be updated appropriately
 as members are edited, added, deleted, recovered, or promoted. This
 application will also work with non generation enabled PDSE's and PDS's.

 Why use, or consider, PDSEGEN:

    1. To see the generations easily
    2. To be able to compare current generation to prior generations to
       see what changed (broke)
    3. To easily recover a prior generation using recover to a new member
       or promote to replace the current base member
    4. To easily clean up obsolete, no longer needed, generations (prune)
    5. To safely copy the base member and all generations
    6. To easily backup and restore without loss of generations
    7. Protection from accidentally editing a non-0 generation
    8. Easily search members and generations
    9. Easy access to up to 15 datasets
    10. Info on which generation is being browsed/edited/viewed
    11. All the above and more
K V='CBTTAPE.ORG' P=PDSEGEN R='*' I=USAGE
 Entry to the dialog is via the PDSEGEN exec. If called with no parameters
 then a prompting panel is displayed.

     Syntax is:
     ISPF Command Line: TSO %PDSEGEN dsname filter set
  or
     ISPF Command Line: PG dsname filter set
  or
     ISPF Option 6: %PDSEGEN dsname filter set

     Where dsname is the dataset name for a PDSE with generations.

     If dsname is * then a display of the last 15 referenced datasets
     will be presented to select from.

     If dsname is ? then the ISPF tutorial will be presented.

     The dsname may also contain a filter - 'sys1.parmlib(ieasys*)'

     Where filter is any valid filter.

        Filter are:  ABC*, ABC: ,ABC, ABC/, /ABC, or ABC
                     TODAY, WEEK, MONTH, YEAR, SINCE YY/MM/DD, SINCE -nn

        The date filters are toggles.

     Where SET is SET=x where x is B, E, V, or / to define the
     default select. This over-rides anything the user may have
     set in the entry panel or using the SET command and is
     saved in the ISPF profile.

 PDSEGEN may also be entered on a DSLIST or ISPF 3.4 dataset list in
 the command field with a / to indicate to use the dataset on that row
 as the PDSE to work with.

K V='CBTTAPE.ORG' P=PDSEGEN R='*' I=COMMANDS
 Within the application there are commands available on the ISPF Command
 line and Line selection commands for each member. See the ISPF Tutorial
 for all commands and options available.

 Command line options are:

        Backup                    to invoke the Backup dialog
        Browse                    to browse a member or members from the
                                  command line: B member or B *, or B A%
        C                         to change to a previous dsn using *
                                  to change to the copy target dsn using >
                                  to display a selection list of previous
                                  dsns using ?
                                  to jump directly to a dsn use #
        Compare member from to    to Compare the 2 generations
                                  e.g. Compare ABC -4 -1
                                  if no member specified then a
                                  prompting panel will popup
        Copy                      Copy from current PDSE to new or existing
                                  PDSE - will allocate new PDSE based
                                  on the current PDSE if create specified
                                  With Copy the space and maxgen can
                                  be changed.
        Edit member               to edit an existing or new member
                                  e.g. E abc or E *, or E A%
        Filter member-pattern     to Filter by member mask
                                  abc* for members starting with abc
                                  *abc for members ending with abc
                                  abc/ for members with abc anywhere
                                  Today for updated today
                                  Week for updated last 7 days
                                  Month for updated last 30 days
                                  Year for updated this year
                                  Since yy/mm/dd
                                  Since -nn
                                  OFF to turn off filtering
        Find string               to find a string in all members/gens
        HIGen                     Display the High Generation members
                                  - known as dummy members
        Locate member or member*  to scroll to the member
                                  e.g. L abc
                                   or  L ab*
        MODel                     to allocate a new dataset based on the
                                  attributes of the current dataset
                                  - after Model the Change > command may
                                    be used to change to the newly created
                                    dataset
        Options                   Display a Primary Command prompting panel
        Output                    to create a report of the active member list
        Prune                     to delete obsolete generations
        Refresh <filter>          to rebuild the member list
                                  with optional filter
        Restore                   to invoke the Restore dialog
        Set                       popup to change the line selection S
                                  action (B, E, V)
        Sort                      Sort by Name, Creation, Changed, or User
                                  - point/shoot for these column headers
                                  Sort Field-name Order where order is A or D
        Submit                    Submit a member, member generation or *
                                  e.g. SUB ABC, or SUB *, or SUB A%C
        Validate                  Validate the PDSE using IEBPDSE
                                  - if clean is enabled in PDSEGENS then the
                                    validate will also force a clean for all
                                    pending deletes.
        View                      To View a member, or members, from the
                                  command line:  V member or V * or V A%
        Quit and Exit             Commands to end the dialog (F3 always works)
K V='CBTTAPE.ORG' P=PDSEGEN R='*' I=SELECTIONS
 Line selection options are (short and long forms):

        A to change attributes (ver/mod/userid)
          - Attrib
        B to browse the member
          - Browse
     ** C or COPy to copy a member to a different dataset
          - May only be used on base members but all generations
            for the selected member will also be copied
        D to delete the member, or a generation
         - Delete
     *  E to edit the member
          - Edit
     ** G Recover a generation to a new member based on the
          name provided via a prompting popup panel
          - RECover
        H hide the member/generation from the table
          to exclude the member/generation from command line
          B *, E *, V *
          - Hide
        I display ISPF statistics for the member or generation
          - Info
        J to submit the member (JCL) to the internal reader
          - Submit
        K to clone a member (generation 0 only)
          - no generations are cloned
          - Klone or Clone
        M to eMail the member (using XMITIP)
          - Mail
        O to display the tutorial for options
     ** P Promote a generation to generation 0
          Copies a non-0 generation into generation 0
          and leaves the user in Edit.  If you save then
          generation 0 is replaced.
          - Promote
      * R to REName a member and all generations
          - REName
        S to use the default option as defined on the entry panel
          - default is B
          - Select
        U to invoke a user command on the dataset(member)
          - including generations
          - User
        V to view the member
          - View
        X to eXecute the member (REXX or CLIST)
          - EXecute
    **  Z to compare the base (gen 0) non-0 generation
          - COMpare
        / to display the tutorial for options

        Placing the cursor on the row and hitting ENTER will also
        select the row.

     * - ONLY allowed for generation 0 members
    ** - ONLY work with non-0 generation members

 Notes:
    - All line selection options can be used in block form - BB/BB or B99
    - Expanded commands may also be blocked by doubling the 1st character,
      e.g. KKlone, but expanded commands may not have a count
    - When using the expanded selection panel then any TSO command, clist,
      or exec can be used along with any valid line selections. The User
      command dialog will be presented to allow the user to enter other
      parameters.
K V='CBTTAPE.ORG' P=PDSEGEN R='*' I=NOTES
 Notes:

 1.  Browse works as you would expect it to

 2.  Using Edit or View you can use all normal edit commands,
     including edit macros. However commands that reference other
     members can only reference the base, or generation 0, member.

 3.  Multiple members may be selected for Browse or View but Edit
     will only work if the member IS NOT saved or updated.  If a
     member is saved or updated then all rows for that member are
     deleted and re-added to include the updated generation info.

 4.  It shouldn't have to be stated but generations are only
     supported for PDSE Version 2 datasets where generations have
     been enabled.

 5.  Edit will be converted to View for non-0 generation members.

 6.  The Compare command only accepts relative generation numbers.

 7.  The Compare line option will compare the base member to the
     selected generation.

 8.  It is possible to allow Edit to edit a generation BUT when that
     happens only the generation is updated and the base member is
     NOT updated. Thus the generation with the update could be lost
     and/or hidden since it is not possible to access a generation
     using dynamic allocation or JCL.

     This application has been configured to prevent editing non-0
     generations.

 9.  The ISPF Edit compare command has been extended using an edit
     macro. The new capabilities include the ability while in Edit to
     compare to another generation of that member (e.g. compare -2)
     or to compare to another member generation (e.g. compare xx -3).
     When in view it is possible to compare to the base (e.g. compare 0)
     or to another member or generation (e.g. compare xxx -1). If the
     compare options do not include a generation then the normal ISPF
     compare will be invoked.

 10. The e-mail option utilizes XMITIP using the XMITIPFE (front end)
     exec. This option is only available if the mail variable is
     customized to 1.

 11. Aliases are NOT supported by the PDSEGENI Rexx Function so this
     application does not support aliases (at this time)

 12. Rename will rename the base member and all generations by doing a
     copy of the generations so they are retained.

 13. Find can be faster if Filter is used prior to the find

 14. Prune operates on only the members in the display list so
     using Filter before Prune is a good way to limit the members
     that Prune will clean up.

 15. Before using Prune a Backup is recommended (CYA).

 16. PDSEGEN supports extended statistics. If a member has more than 64K
     (65535) records then the only way to display the actual record count
     is to turn on extended statistics using the ISPF Edit command STATS
     EXT.

 17. When Hide is active, Delete, Prune, and Rename are not available.

 18. The Member list display defaults to a 2 digit year display. Using the
     Left or Right keys (F10 or F11) will shift to use the 4 digit year
     display by removing the Initial size field from the table. This view
     is remembered across sessions.

 19. If you see a member with a -1 generation and there is no 0 generation
     that indicates that the member was deleted outside of PDSEGEN. The
     normal ISPF member delete will delete the base member but leave the
     generations and the base member will become the -1 generation.
K V='CBTTAPE.ORG' P=PDSEGEN R='*' I=BACKUP
K* Restore
 PDSEGBAK and PDSEGRST are rexx utilities that utilizes the PDSEGENI REXX
 function and ISPF services to make a complete backup of a PDSE V2 that
 has members with generations, and then provides the ability to restore
 that backup.

 NOTE 1: If the backup PDS does not have generations enabled then an
         error message will be generated as this is not the best utility
         to process datasets without member generations defined.

 NOTE 2: The target PDS for both backup and restore must NOT exist as
         it will be dynamically allocated as needed.

 NOTE 3: There are times when PDSEGBAK will fail in batch. This occurs
         for some generations, not for base members, and is an issue
         where ISPF in batch encounters some issue that I haven't figured
         out yet. The solution is to delete the offending generation and
         then the backup should proceed to the next offending generation
         or to successful completion. I can't recreate at will and
         haven't seen anything in the ispfvcall traces.

 Backup will create a new PDS based on the space allocations and DCB
 for the source PDSE. It will then copy all the members with their
 generations into a backup PDS. The backup PDS can then be processed
 by any existing utility that can process a PDS without fear of
 having the member generations lost.

 Three special members in the backup PDS are $ALLOC and $INDEX.

    $ALLOC contains the maxgen specification of the original PDSE so
    that the PDSE can be recreated during the restoration process.

    $BACKUP contains the backup report generated during the backup
    process.

    $INDEX contains a list of all members with their backup member
    names. This is used during the restoration process. The members
    are created in the correct sequence so that after restoration the
    base member will be the correct base member and the relative
    generations will be their original relative generation. The
    absolute generation number will be lost but the key is to use is
    the relative generation (right?).

 The member names within the backup PDS are special members that
 retain all the ISPF statistics of the original PDSE.

 Restore (using either PDSEGBAK or PDSEGRST) will read in the $ALLOC
 member to pick up the MAXGEN specification so that it can allocate a new
 PDSE with that MAXGEN value. It will then read in the $INDEX member and
 use ISPF LMCOPY to copy each backup member into the restore target PDSE
 in sequence in order to retain the correct relative generation sequence.

 Before the target dataset is allocated the $ALLOC MAXGEN value is
 compared to the system MAXGENS_LIMIT value. If the system value is
 greater than the $ALLOC value then a warning message is issued and
 the target dataset is allocated using the system limit. NOTE: This
 could result in lost generations.

 PDSEGBAK can be run without options under ISPF and will display a
 prompting ISPF Panel to assist with performing the backup or restore.
 It can also be run in batch using the TMP with all the appropriate
 ISPF allocations (see member SAMPBR for sample JCL for this).

 The command syntax to run outside of the dialog is:

  Syntax:    %pdsegbak input output option1 option2

             input  is either the pdse with member/gens
                    or the backup pds
             output is the target dataset for backup or
                    restore.  this dataset will be
                    allocated based on the input dataset
             option1 is:  backup or restore
             option2 is:  batch or null

             If no parameters, or just a input parm, and running
             under ISPF in the foreground then display a prompting
             panel

             If option2 is batch then the backup/restore report
             will be written to the terminal for online scripting
             instead of opened in ispf browse.

 PDSEGRST is a improved restore utility that provides the ability to
 restore to an existing, or new, PDSE. It also allows for member and/or
 generation selection during the restore.

 Syntax:    %pdsegrst backup-dsn target-dsn mbr gen / NEW

            backup-dsn   PDSEGEN Backup PDS
            target-dsn   PDS/PDSE to restore to
                         ** must exist **
            mbr          Member name or member pattern
            gen          Absolute or Relative Gen to
                         restore

            / NEW        allocate the target PDSE

            mbr is optional - default is all
            gen is optional - default is all generations
            / NEW is optional and may be any non-blank char

 Usage Notes:
           1. If restoring to a PDS or PDSE without
              generations then only the base (gen 0)
              will be restored.
           2. If gen is not specified then all generations
              will be restored starting with the oldest to
              the newest. This retains the relative
              generations number.
           3. The absolute generation number cannot be
              retained on restoration.
           4. If the member already exists in the target
              then the existing member/generations will
              be pushed up the relative generation range
              until they roll out.
           5. If the option / NEW is specified then the
              target PDSE will be allocated using the DCB
              and space of the backup PDS/PDSE and using
              the MAXGEN found in the Backup $ALLOC member
K V='CBTTAPE.ORG' P=PDSEGEN R='*' I=CREDITS

 Acknowledgements:  Thanks are due to Thomas Reed of IBM who presented at
                    the 2015 SHARE in Seattle on PDSE V2 Member
                    Generations and provided sample code for finding the
                    generations which I've used as a starting place for
                    my dialog.

                    Thanks also to the following for testing, commenting,
                    trouble shooting, and making suggestions to improve
                    this tool:

                    * Bill Smith        * Sam Golob
                    * Bruce Koss        * Tom Conley
                    * John Kalinich     * Greg Price
                    * Salvador Carrasco
