CAVXTRT - CA-View Extract ISPF Dialog

This dialog is intended as a more user friendly interface to the CA-View
reports. The options available with this dialog are:

    - Broswe a report (using ISPF Browse)
    - View a report (using ISPF View)
    - Copy a report to a dataset
    - Mail a report (using XMITIP)
    - Print a report
    - Transfer a report to a workstation
    - Load a report from CA-View tape to CA-View disk

This code has been tested on OS/390 2.10 and z/OS 1.9 with CA-View 2.0
and CA-View 11.0. It is slightly (does a dynamic lookup) dependent
upon the report format generated by SARBCH with the /LIST statement.
If this report format changes then the code which parses the report
will have to be changed.

        Syntax:    %cavxtrt option(s)

                   Valid Options:
                   database - invoke using this specified
                              CA-View database
                   /CA     - Invoke the Computer Associates
                             CA-View ISPF Interface for all
                             selections.
                   /LAST   - Use the last CA-View Database
                             and bypass the database prompt

Installation:

1. Execute the RECEIVE member of this dataset to expand the EXEC and
   PANELS members into partitioned datasets.

   e.g.   from ISPF 3.4 on the line where this dataset is
          ex /(receive)

   This command will also build a member in this dataset called
   TRYEXEC which can be executed to test out this exec.

2. Update SYS1.PARMLIB member IKJTSOxx for each LPAR to add SARBCH to
   the AUTHPGM section.  After doing the update you can dynamically
   implement the change by entering from TSO on each LPAR:

           PARMLIB UPDATE(xx)

3. Customization required
   The customizations are required in the CAVXTRTD Rexx Exec. This
   exec must be customized for your environment before use.

   After customization use the TESTCAVX Rexx exec to validate your
   changes.

   At this point you can try it out by using the TRYEXEC that was
   created during the RECEIVE process.

   e.g.   from ISPF 3.4 on the line where the install dataset is:
          ex /(tryexec)

4. Copy the libraries created in (1) into appropriate libraries in your
   normal TSO/ISPF concatenation.

5. Enter the exec from any ISPF Panel by entering TSO %CAVXTRT

See the member ANNSAMP for a sample user announcement.

This code is provided as is, with no warranty or recourse should it
not function in your environment.

Comments, suggestions, and complaints should be directed to the author at:

  Lionel B. Dyck
  Kaiser Permanente Information Technology
  Walnut Creek, CA 94598
  Internet: lionel.b.dyck@kp.org
