This member documents briefly the logic used by the CAVXTRT (CA-View Extract)
ISPF Dialog.

1. Test for ISPF Applid of CAVX and if not then
   - create CAVX ISPF Commands table to support the use of RFIND
   - reinvoke command with CAVX ISPF Applid

2. Process an parameter options
   - user may specify a specific CA-View database name
   - /CA will cause all database selections to be passed to
    the Computer Associates CA-View ISPF dialog
   - /LAST will use the last used database

3. If no database or no /LAST then the Get_DB routine will build
   an ISPF selection table of avialable CA-View databases.  The
   user may then select one of the databases using point-and-shoot
   or any non-blank character in the selection field. Selection
   option of C will invoke the Computer Associates CA-View ISPF
   Dialog.

4. The Report selection specification panel prompts for Report-ID,
   Report generation and optional from and to dates.

   - The report-id may be a full 12 character report-id or may be
     masked. A single * may mask a single character.  A double *
     may mask multiple characters. e.g. ab**g*i*
   - The report generation may be blank, *, or ALL for All reports
     or may be a specific generation number
   - The From-Date may be TODAY, WEEK, MONTH, or a specific date
     in the format of mm/dd/yy (or for European dd/mm/yy).
   - The To-Date is only used if there is a From-Date and may only
     be in the format of mm/dd/yy (or for European dd/mm/yy) or TODAY
     (which is the default).

   Note: The date processing is performed within this application

5. Once the selection criteria is defined then a SARBCH /LIST control
   statement is generated and the SARBCH program is called. The resulting
   report is then processed to built an ISPF selection table display of
   all eligible reports.  If a report generation mask was specified then
   it is altered for the /LIST statement appropriately.

6. The Report selection table is displayed and the user may now select
   any report. Multiple reports may be selected but only one is processed
   at a time.

   All reports that are selected will be processed in a similar manner
   except the L (load) option.
   - Call the generalized extract routine
   - If the report is not on Disk (in Location DISK, PDSK, PERM, TEMP,
     or PTMP) then the selection option is changed to L (Load)
   - If the report is on Disk then invoke the appropriate routine to
     process the extracted report.
   - All options, except C (Copy), will have the extracted report dataset
     deleted upon completion of the process.

   Valid commands on this display are:
   - Refresh
     Rebuild the selection list by executing the SARBCH program with
     the generated /LIST statement.
   - Find
     Find a character string in either the report-id or the jobname
   - Enter key
     Will check the status of any report processed using the L (Load)
     selection option.

   Valid selection options are:
   - B
     Use ISPF Browse on the extracted report.
   - C
     Extract the report to a prompted for dataset name.
   - L
     Generate the appropriate SARBCH /PRINT statement and generate
     the necessary JCL to cause the requested report to be loaded
     from CA-View tape to a CA-View managed disk file. The JCL is
     automatically submitted.
   - M
     Pass the extracted dataset name to the XMITIP ISPF dialog using
     the XMITIPFE (XMITIP Front-End) interface.
   - P
     Print the report using the PRINTDS command after prompting the
     user for output information. This prompting panel is very similar
     to the SDSF XS (extract sysout) panel and uses that ISPF Help
     panel.
   - T
     Display a prompt panel for the user with a command entry field
     so the user can use their 3270 terminal emulator to download
     the report. If using IND$FILE the command is processed by this
     application (which just invokes it).  If using TCP/IP FTP then
     the prompting panel displays a sample set of FTP commands.
   - V
     Use ISPF View on the extracted report.
