 CRMEMB: Cross Reference MEMbers

 This facility has been developed to perform member list comparisons
 between three or more PDS's. (For 2 datasets, use MM direct).

 Volsers must be supplied if the datasets are not catalogued on the
 executing system.

 The routine is designed to act on expanded JCL (or an extract), and
 dataset names will be extracted from 'DSN=...' and an optional
 'VOL=SER=...' JCL parameters.
 If the JCL is a procedure, contains INCLUDE statements or JCL
 variables, some or all of the following routines will need to be
 executed first:
   C3      - CICS 3rd. party analyser.  Even if the JCL is not a CICS
             job, this routine does extensive variable substitutions
             and expansions of procedures.
   C3I     - Supplement to the "C3" command and will expand and JCL
             'INCLUDE' parameters.
   SYMSUB /A {/L}
           - Performs variable substitutions that may be introduced by
             the expansion of include statements.  Use the '/L'
             parameter to for varible assignment searches from the last
             card up (as would be performed by an instream PROC with
             variable assignments below the "PEND" command.
             Note: If you use combinations of trailing PROC variables
                   and top of JCL "SET" commands, you may not get the
                   right results (after all this is not an expensive
                   JCLCHECK).

 Data may be entered via a parameter PDS(member) or direct from screen
 input.

 This routine will compare the member list of the source datasets one by
 one with the member list of the destination datasets. A report will be
 generated on all the HITS, MISSES or BOTH (depending on option entered
 in the input panel.

 The parameter file must have a dataset on each line prefixed by DSN. If
 the dataset is not catalogued, you may indicate the volser by supplying
 a VOL=SER=volume as the next parameter on the line. The dataset name
 and volser may be seperated by space(s) or a comma. This data may be
 standard JCL, eg. DD concatenations.
 (At this stage both the DSN and VOL=SER statements must be on the same
 line.  If they are not, you will have to doctor the JCL accordingly.
 The line does not have to be syntactically correct, but dataset must be
 prefixed by 'DSN=' and the volume by 'VOL=SER=' literals for
 processing/parsing purposes.)

 You must specify the start line number of the source dataset and the
 end line number along with the start and end of the destination
 datasets. If only one dataset is desired both the start and end line
 numbers should be the same.  You may also specify a source and a
 destination volser. However, this will expect all source and all the
 destination datasets to be on the specified disks. Any in stream
 VOL=SER= parameter will overwrite the supplied one for processing that
 dataset.

 It is not recommended that source and destination ranges overlap unless
 either a converse perspective is required or you are comparing datasets
 on different volumes.  However, if there is overlap and/or a lot of
 datasets processed, expect lengthy batch execution times (several
 hours).

 Be aware of output limitations. There is a limit to batch TSO displays
 (?  value).

 You may edit the data dataset, under part 1, by entering E on the
 command line.  A member list is provided unless the member is enterd.

 You may browse or edit either the source or destination datasets, under
 part 2, by entering B1, B2, E1 or E2 respectively on the command line.

 Enter EDIT on the command line to edit the JCL generated prior to
 submission.  You may wish to do this to change message classes etc...
 (This may not be necessary as some sites may automatically present the
 JCL and not have it optional.)

 You may enter R in either the source or destination dataset or volsers
 to repeat the alternative to minimise typing and possible errors.

 You may enter SW on the command line to swap the two dataset positions
 in Part 2.


   Parameters (passed variables):
      CRMEMP0  - Starting line of the JCL to extract DSN from for
                 source DSN.
      CRMEMP0E - Ending line of the JCL to extract DSN from for
                 source DSN.
      CRMEMP1  - Starting line of the JCL to extract DSN from for
                 compare with DSN.
      CRMEMP1E - Ending line of the JCL to extract DSN from for
                 compare with DSN.
      CRMEMV1  - Volser of source DSNs.
      CRMEMV2  - Volser of with DSNs.
                 For both CRMEMV1 and CRMEMV2, the parameter may be
                 passed on the JCL statement if the 'DSN=' is the
                 last parameter in the JCL line and it is followed
                 by 'VOL=SER=volser'.
      CRMEMP2  - What to report on. valid values are:
                    'ALL'  report on all members.
                    'HITS' report only found members.
                    'MISS' report only not found members.
      CRMEMPDS - Dataset where JCL resides.
      CRMEMMEM - Member name.

   The following members are required to package this routine:
     REXX:
       $ALK*    o Number of generic housekeeping routines.
       BATCHISP - Set up JCL for ISPF in batch. Dynamically
                  customised for site.
       CRMEMB   - Driver.
                  Self invoked as macro#1:
                    Edit macro. Run in batch for processing from PDS
                    member (part 1).
                  Self invoked as macro#2:
                    Edit macro. Run in batch for processing from
                    direct dataset entry (part 2).
       CRMEMBDH o Dynamic tutorial (requires access to HELPDRVR).
       TEMPSUB  o Auto submitter.
       XRPL     o Subtract DFHRPL information out of JESJCL past of
                  held output for CRMEB processing.  This option uses
                  SJF (Sdsf Jcl Format) and JF (Jcl Format) to format
                  output and remove the unnecessary crap. This
                  process also retains the STEPLIB DD's just in case
                  it may be required.

     Panels:
       CRMEMBP  - Parameter entry panel.

     Skeleton:
       CRMEMBS  - Skeleton JCL to execute in batch.

