%headline=' Installation '
 Site Installation for CSGCH.
!g
 1. Receive dataset. But this has already been done to be reading this.
    (Assume dataset is 'CICS.LOGON.ALLINONE'.)

 2. Copy member CSGCH$$ into CSGCH$. Site customisation member CSGCH$ is shipped
    as CSGCH$$ to prevent creaming CSGCH$ during upgrades.  During upgrades you
    may need to manually update CSGCH$ with any new field variables in CSGCG$$.
    Use edit-macro 'CSGCH$VF' to assist you in finding new variables.

 3. You may optionally receive 2 load modules:
      BATCHSIN - Program to read in variable substituted parameters
                 and output to a file for input as comments to
                 DFHCSDUP jobs.
      DFH0CBDC - COBOL CSD extract program.
    If these two programs are used ensure CSGCH$ is updated appropriately.
    Generally variable "cicstl2" is used for the load library's name.  The name
    of these programs may vary with sites.

 4. Customise member ANY1 to point all libraries to the dataset in point 1 above
          - or -
    change in-house logon allocation routines as applicable.

 5. Customise member CSGCH$ to site standards. Take special note of the region
    name customisations in two specific areas:
    a) When invoked with 1st. parameter as 'REGION'. This is used to massage the
       region name for member generation and converse expansion. Unique CISC
       names should be reduced to 4 characters or less (may start wit numerics
       as will be contained in the middle of the member name.

    b) Variable 'reg' (name extracted from the region field list) passed from
       CSGCH may need to be massaged if the full name is not used in dataset
       names.
    Note - There is a description of each of the variables used at the bottom of
           the member.
         - Care when defining space and comma seperated lists.
         - No variable should return a null value.
         - Most field may be temporarily modified by using the UPDATE feature in
           the DSN display.
         - Use the SIP=Y/N command to change CSD update methodoligy on the fly.

 6. If the ANY1 option is to be used then invoke under Native TSO (READY
    prompt), enter:

 7. Enter ISPF and enter TSO CSGCH.
    Note - Will self invoke if not running in applid "CSG" so sticky variables
           will be available whatever screen it is launced from.

 8. Use the walktrhrough doco or on-line help (? on command line or pull down
    help menu) as applicable.

 9. You may invoke the dynamic doco externally to the change system as follows
    if you used the ANY1 option:
    a) Enter "TSO %HELPDRVR CSGCHELP=CSGCHELP" on any command line.

                     End Of Installation details.
!G
