)F FUNCTION -

   The TELL command sets-up a teleconference with another user.  The
user must be logged-on and accepting messages.  If both users are
using this command, communications between them can be much more
convenient than if they use the SEND command, but still more
difficult than that exotic new invention, the telephone.
)X SYNTAX -

          TELL 'userid'

   You will find that this command works best if you keep a couple of
things in mind, and follow a few rules.  Once you have established a
TELL session, almost everything you type is sent verbatim to the other
user.  Your set of messages are preceded by a single line:

              FOLLOWING MESSAGES FROM ...your userid...-

   Each line that you type gets a dash (-) attached to the end of it,
telling the other user that you are not finished with your current
train of thought.  After you are done with a single train of thought
(and keep them short, please), leave a couple of spaces and type the
characters

             GA

on the end of the last line you typed.  a dash will not be appended to
that line, and the "GA" will be the cue to your other user to start
replying.  If you ever teleconferenced before, particularly on the
ARPANET, you might realize that "GA" stands for "Go Ahead."  When you
see your other user's "GA," then you start typing again, and so on.

   There's one little problem with this, and that's the fact that you
must hit the ENTER key to see your other user's messages.  This is due
to the fact that TSO terminal support can't send output to your
terminal while it is waiting for input.  You can get around this by
going into what I call "half duplex mode."  Simply type .h as the first
two characters on a line.  At that point your keyboard will lock.  To
unlock the keyboard, hit the ATTN key.  The keyboard will stay unlocked
until TELL sees GA on the end of a line, with which it will lock the
keyboard again.  While the keyboard is locked, any messages sent to you
will appear as the other user hits ENTER.  To reply, hit ATTN again,
and so forth.  Don't forget to type GA at the end of a message, or your
other user will not know to reply, and the keyboard will not lock.

At any time if the ATTN key does not work, as it will not with older "A"
type non-SNA 327x sessions (see the lower left corner of your screen),
try the sequence RESET - PA1.

   To end a TELL session, type    /*   as the first 2 characters of a
line.  Your other user will then get the following message:

         END OF MESSAGES FROM ...your userid...
)O
   Good luck, and happy teleconferencing.  Just remember one thing:
If you can, use the phone...  It's a lot quicker.
