site:          http://os390-mvs.hypermart.net
email:            tfalissard@compuserve.com
proprietor:       Thierry Falissard

page:  http://os390-mvs.hypermart.net/homepage.htm
       http://os390-mvs.hypermart.net/utilmvs.htm

                             Utilities for MVS

                             Thierry FALISSARD

                                  "Image"

                       Last update : 24 October 1999
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
Interesting  Here are the most important sites as far as "MVS
FTPs and     freeware" is concerned.
utilities
for MVS      There is also a separate page for my own technical
             articles and for some mainframe sites I recommend.
"Image"
             Where's the doc, Doc ?

             See member IPOUPDTE for the official (now new) IBM URL
             which points to IPOUPDTE/CPPUPDTE documentation.  The
             "unofficial" version is here.   (SG)

             * IPOUPDTE now documented ! This useful utility is no
             more maintained by IBM, no more documented, but still
             used by many MVS sites. "Image"sur le site d'E
             Bouladoux, la doc Ipoupdte en frangais.

             * "Image"The ISRDDN Diagnostic utility, from Doug
             Nadel, the author of this useful ISPF utility : ISRDDN.

             The CBT tape

             * NaSPA MVS library (CBT tape) is THE site for MVS
             Freeware :  The CBT Tape Home Page. The access to Naspa
             MVS library is now restricted. Sam Golob gives recent
             information about the CBT tape. (see www.cbttape.org)

             * Here are on my site the utilities that were the most
             useful for me :

             * SHOWMVS v622e (the object, 204k) and a JCL to run
             SHOWMVS (you may run it in batch or call it directly
             from TSO). My packaging differs from Gilbert
             Saint-Flour's one, as it is ready-to-use (the source is
             not provided). Transfer the 2 files to MVS (LRECL 80,
             binary transfer). You can also unload SHOWMVS from
             Gilbert Saint-flour's site. Gilbert is the original
             author of Showmvs, enlighted contributors are now
             Roland Schiradin and Jerry Morris.

             * February 1999 version of Showmvs : SHOWMVS v623d (the
             object, 234k).

             * REVIEW is great for displaying VSAM files, SMF files,
             etc.

             * A very handy disassembler is DISASM. Rebuild the
             zones and the code in no time.

             * Free PDS version 8.5 is a useful (although not for
             newbies) utility to do whatever you want on PDS files,
             it is available on http://members.aol.com/freepds.

             * Vtocutil version 2.2 to list and change Format-1 DSCB
             information for DASD volumes with Indexed VTOCs.

             * The best dynamic allocation program is DYNAM (on
             CBT089).

             Xephon

             Xephon archives are incredible ! There are hundreds of
             mainframe related articles and programs for free ! Some
             were written by yours truly, others are of big
             interest, like this super scratch program, or this
             general purpose subroutine to manage VSAM files.

             SHARE

             SHARE organization is working on a "MVS cluster" that
             provides interesting samples and presentations. I
             recommend SRS, a freeware based on the new SAPI
             interface, as a clever replacement for External
             Writers.

             SHARE Proceedings on the Web are a unique source of
             information (many presentations).

             Free monitors

             Not every site can afford Candle's or B&B's or
             Landmark's tools. Here are good quality free monitors.

             * Doug Nadel's ISPF tools : Tasid, a free MVS monitor ;
             QueryENQ, a REXX function to return ENQ status on a
             data set or any rname/qname ; and many more ! Doug is a
             well known ISPF expert. Doug's old page on IBM's site
             has disappeared.  * MXI (MVS eXtended Information) from
             SEC in UK is an ISPF-based application that enables the
             MVS Systems Programmer to display important
             configuration information about the active MVS system.
             I find it gives in-depth information.

             IBM

             OK, IBM is a money-maker - however they offer some free
             stuff.

             * TRSMAIN is a free IBM compression utility that is available
             on the Boulder IBM FTP site.

             * The OpenEdition Setup Verification Program (SVP) from
             IBM: a very good sample of REXX building and using
             panels on the fly.

             * IBM Raleigh (FTP) : APPC samples.

             * OS/390 UNIX System Services Tools and toys.

             Other (mainframe)

             * MVS documentation: interesting documents from Clemson
             University.

             * WIN3270: a TSO 3270 Full Screen Dialog Tool, by David
             A Fahey.

             * TCP/IP monitor: Dave Alcock's freeware for monitoring
             TCP/IP from ISPF.

             * LPALIST: interesting utility from Michael Cleary to
             analyze your LPA.

             * REXXFP: useful system-oriented subroutines for REXX
             from Gerard Nicol.

             * The REXX Macros Toolbox : David McRitchie's
             utilities. David is also a SPF/PC fan.

             * Stanford (FTP) : various MVS & TSO programs
             maintained by Leonard Woren, including TSO QUEUE and
             TAPEMAP.

             * A cross-memory routine (here an example) is certainly
             one of the most difficult MVS programs a Systems
             Programmer can write.

             * MVS/JES2 Software has in fact no JES2-related
             software, but some interesting TSO tools.

             * "Image"Jan Jaeger's S/390 System Utilities:
             Standalone utilities for MVS, including editor, VTOC
             list, device list, DASD ZAP etc. I have no time to
             review them, but ZZSA (stand-alone utility for DASD
             handling) seemed of interest.

             Other (more or less mainframe related)

             * PC/370 v4.2 IBM 370 assembler and emulator: enables
             you to code assembler S/370 programs on your PC !

             * QWS3270: Jim Rymerson's very useful "Windows Sockets
             3270 Telnet" - I use it to get connected to MVS systems
             across the Net.

             * WS_FTP : a popular FTP utility, available for download.

             * FTP Search : to locate FTP sites.

             * WEBsaver : to download an entire WEB site (written by
             a Frenchie).

             * CRCheck is a good PC utility to check the integrity of
             files.

 "Image"Free download !

 You may now download my utility MGCRYPT for Windows (775K), a DES
 encryption tool. It is supposed to accompany Megacrypt/MVS, a DES
 encryption utility for MVS systems (with subroutines for your
 applications). Usage of MGCRYPT is free for individuals, companies
 are invited to contact us.

 Technical note: after having unzipped Mgcrypt.zip, you get
 Mgcrypt.exe (a program written in VB4), which is in fact a Windows
 interface for DOS commands "CIPHR.EXE" and "DCIPHR.EXE" called in
 background to encipher or decipher files. After processing, file
 size is not modified (Megacrypt does not append headers to
 enciphered files, and the validity of keys is never controlled).

 Warning : this program is distributed as freeware code with no
 warranty either expressed or implied ; use it at your own risk.

