                 OAC build TSO service parm lists macro

label    OACBLDPL CPPL=,ECB=,RS=R0,RT=R15,                             x
                  IOPL=,CSPL=,PPL=,DFPL=,DRFAIL=,gnrfail=

     label  - The label which is to appear on the first generated
              instruction

     CPPL=  - The address of the CPPL passed to the command at
              entry.

     ECB=   - The address of a fullword to be used as an attention
              ecb by the TSO service routines

     RS=    - A register to be used as a work regiser in the macro

     Rt=    - A register to be used as a work regiser in the macro

     IOPL= (iopl,iopb)    - If not coded, the IOPL will not be built
              iopl - The address of an IOPL to be filled in by the
                     macro
              iopb - The address of an IOPB which is to be stored in
                     the IOPL. If not coded, no address is stored.

     CSPL=(cspl,flags,csoa,cbuf) - If not coded no CSPL will be built
              cspl - The address of a CSPL to be filled in by the
                     macro.
              flags- The address of the flag word which is to be
                     stored in the CSPL. If not coded, is not stored.
              csoa - The address of a CSOA which is to be stored in
                     the CSPL. If not coded, is not stored.
              cbuf - The address of a command buffer which is to be
                     stored in the CSPL. If not coded, is not stored.

     PPL=(ppl,pcl,ans,cbuf,uwa)  - If not coded no PPL will be built
              ppl  - The address of a PPL to be filled in by the macro.
              pcl  - The address of a PCL which is to be stored in the
                     PPL. If not coded, is not stored.
              ans  - The address of the "answer place" which is to be
                     stored in the PPL. If not coded is not stored.
              cbuf - The address of the command buffer which is to be
                     stored in the PPL. If not coded is not stored.
              uwa  - The address of a USER WORK AREA which is to be
                     stored in the PPL.

     DFPL=(dfpl,dfpb)            - If not coded no DFPL will be built
              dfpl - The address of a DFPL to be filled in by the macro.
              dfpb - The address of a DFPB which is to be stored in the
                     DFPL. If not coded, is not stored.

     DRFAIL=(dfparms,rbp,rcp,jeff02,idp,bufp)
              dfparms - The address of the DAIRFAIL parm area to be
                        filled in by this macro
              rbp     - The address of the failing request block. If
                        not coded, is not stored
              rcp     - The address of the return code (r15) from
                        SVC99. If not coded, is not stored.
              jeff02  - The address of a fullword containing
                        the address of IKJEFF02 or zero if
                        unknown. If not coded, is not stored.
              idp     - The address of a two byte flag field
                        containing the caller ID and service options.
                        If not coded, is not stored.
              bufp    - The address of the DAIRFAIL optional buffers.
                        If not coded, is not stored.
     gnrfail=gfparms  - the address of the gnrlfail parms.
